do you think of that? Ha! ha! ha!'

'Fedka, fill me a pipe!' said Bazarov rudely.

'And there's another doctor here who just got to a patient,' Vassily
Ivanovitch persisted in a kind of desperation, 'when the patient had
gone _ad patres_; the servant didn't let the doctor speak; you're no
longer wanted, he told him. He hadn't expected this, got confused, and
asked, "Why, did your master hiccup before his death?" "Yes." "Did he
hiccup much?" "Yes." "Ah, well, that's all right," and off he set back
again. Ha! ha! ha!'

The old man was alone in his laughter; Arkady forced a smile on his
face. Bazarov simply stretched. The conversation went on in this way
for about an hour; Arkady had time to go to his room, which turned out
to be the anteroom attached to the bathroom, but was very snug and
clean. At last Tanyusha came in and announced that dinner was ready.

Vassily Ivanovitch was the first to get up. 'Come, gentlemen. You must
be magnanimous and pardon me if I've bored you. I daresay my good wife
will give you more satisfaction.'

The dinner, though prepared in haste, turned out to be very good, even
abundant; only the wine was not quite up to the mark; it was almost
black sherry, bought by Timofeitch in the town at a well-known
merchant's, and had a faint coppery, resinous taste, and the flies were
a great nuisance. On ordinary days a serf-boy used to keep driving them
away with a large green branch; but on this occasion Vassily Ivanovitch
had sent him away through dread of the criticism of the younger
generation. Arina Vlasyevna had had time to dress: she had put on a
high cap with silk ribbons and a pale blue flowered shawl. She broke
down again directly she caught sight of her Enyusha, but her husband
had no need to admonish her; she made haste to wipe away her tears
herself, for fear of spotting her shawl. Only the young men ate
anything; the master and mistress of the house had dined long ago.
Fedka waited at table, obviously encumbered by having boots on for the
first time; he was assisted by a woman of a masculine cast of face and
one eye, by name Anfisushka, who performed the duties of housekeeper,
poultry-woman, and laundress. Vassily Ivanovitch walked up and down
during the whole of dinner, and with a perfectly happy, positively
beatific countenance, talked about the serious anxiety he felt at
Napoleon's policy, and the intricacy of the Italian question. Arina
Vlasyevna took no notice of Arkady. She did not press him to eat;
leaning her round face, to which the full cherry-coloured lips and the
little moles on the cheeks and over the eyebrows gave a very simple
good-natured expression, on her little closed fist, she did not take
her eyes off her son, and kept constantly sighing; she was dying to
know for how long he had come, but she was afraid to ask him.

'What if he says for two days,' she thought, and her heart sank. After
the roast Vassily Ivanovitch disappeared for an instant, and returned
with an opened half-bottle of champagne. 'Here,' he cried, 'though we
do live in the wilds, we have something to make merry with on festive
occasions!' He filled three champagne glasses and a little wineglass,
proposed the health of 'our inestimable guests,' and at once tossed off
his glass in military fashion; while he made Arina Vlasyevna drink her
wineglass to the last drop. When the time came in due course for
preserves, Arkady, who could not bear anything sweet, thought it his
duty, however, to taste four different kinds which had been freshly
made, all the more as Bazarov flatly refused them and began at once
smoking a cigarette. Then tea came on the scene with cream, butter, and
cracknels; then Vassily Ivanovitch took them all into the garden to
admire the beauty of the evening. As they passed a garden seat he
whispered to Arkady--

'At this spot I love to meditate, as I watch the sunset; it suits a
recluse like me. And there, a little farther off, I have planted some
of the trees beloved of Horace.'

'What trees?' asked Bazarov, overhearing.

'Oh ... acacias.'

Bazarov began to yawn.

'I imagine it's time our travellers were in the arms of Morpheus,'
observed Vassily Ivanovitch.

'That is, it's time for bed,' Bazarov put in. 'That's a correct idea.
It is time, certainly.'

As he said good-night to his mother, he kissed her on the forehead,
while she embraced him, and stealthily behind his back she gave him her
blessing three times. Vassily Ivanovitch conducted Arkady to his room,
and wished him 'as refreshing repose as I enjoyed at your happy years.'
And Arkady did as a fact sleep excellently in his bath-house; there was
a smell of mint in it, and two crickets behind the stove rivalled each
other in their drowsy chirping. Vassily Ivanovitch went from Arkady's
room to his study, and perching on the sofa at his son's feet, he was
looking forward to having a chat with him; but Bazarov at once sent him
away, saying he was sleepy, and did not fall asleep till morning. With
wide open eyes he stared vindictively into the darkness; the memories
of childhood had no power over him; and besides, he had not yet had
time to get rid of the impression of his recent bitter emotions. Arina
Vlasyevna first prayed to her heart's content, then she had a long,
long conversation with Anfisushka, who stood stock-still before her
mistress, and fixing her solitary eye upon her, communicated in a
mysterious whisper all her observations and conjectures in regard to
Yevgeny Vassilyevitch. The old lady's head was giddy with happiness and
wine and tobacco smoke; her husband tried to talk to her, but with a
wave of his hand gave it up in despair.

Arina Vlasyevna was a genuine Russian gentlewoman of the olden times;
she ought to have lived two centuries before, in the old Moscow days.
She was very devout and emotional; she believed in fortune-telling,
charms, dreams, and omens of every possible kind; she believed in the
prophecies of crazy people, in house-spirits, in wood-spirits, in
unlucky meetings, in the evil eye, in popular remedies, she ate
specially prepared salt on Holy Thursday, and believed that the end of
the world was at hand; she believed that if on Easter Sunday the lights
did not go out at vespers, then there would be a good crop of
buckwheat, and that a mushroom will not grow after it has been looked
on by the eye of man; she believed that the devil likes to be where
there is water, and that every Jew has a blood-stained patch on his
breast; she was afraid of mice, of snakes, of frogs, of sparrows, of
leeches, of thunder, of cold water, of draughts, of horses, of goats,
of red-haired people, and black cats, and she regarded crickets and
dogs as unclean beasts; she never ate veal, doves, crayfishes, cheese,
asparagus, artichokes, hares, nor water-melons, because a cut
water-melon suggested the head of John the Baptist, and of oysters she
could not speak without a shudder; she was fond of eating--and fasted
rigidly; she slept ten hours out of the twenty-four--and never went to
bed at all if Vassily Ivanovitch had so much as a headache; she had
never read a single book except _Alexis or the Cottage in the Forest_;
she wrote one, or at the most two letters in a year, but was great in
housewifery, preserving, and jam-making, though with her own hands she
never touched a thing, and was generally disinclined to move from her
place. Arina Vlasyevna was very kindhearted, and in her way not at all
stupid. She knew that the world is divided into masters whose duty it
is to command, and simple folk whose duty it is to serve them--and so
she felt no repugnance to servility and prostrations to the ground; but
she treated those in subjection to her kindly and gently, never let a
single beggar go away empty-handed, and never spoke ill of any one,
though she was fond of gossip. In her youth she had been pretty, had
played the clavichord, and spoken French a little; but in the course of
many years' wanderings with her husband, whom she had married against
her will, she had grown stout, and forgotten music and French. Her son
she loved and feared unutterably; she had given up the management of
the property to Vassily Ivanovitch--and now did not interfere in
anything; she used to groan, wave her handkerchief, and raise her
eyebrows higher and higher with horror directly her old husband began
to discuss the impending government reforms and his own plans. She was
apprehensive, and constantly expecting some great misfortune, and began
to weep directly she remembered anything sorrowful.... Such women are
not common nowadays. God knows whether we ought to rejoice!






On getting up Arkady opened the window, and the first object that met
his view was Vassily Ivanovitch. In an Oriental dressing-gown girt
round the waist with a pocket-handkerchief he was industriously digging
in his garden. He perceived his young visitor, and leaning on his
spade, he called, 'The best of health to you! How have you slept?'

'Capitally,' answered Arkady.

'Here am I, as you see, like some Cincinnatus, marking out a bed for
late turnips. The time has come now--and thank God for it!--when every
one ought to obtain his sustenance with his own hands; it's useless to
reckon on others; one must labour oneself. And it turns out that Jean
Jacques Rousseau is right. Half an hour ago, my dear young gentleman,
you might have seen me in a totally different position. One peasant
woman, who complained of looseness--that's how they express it, but in
our language, dysentery--I ... how can I express it best? I
administered opium, and for another I extracted a tooth. I proposed an
an√¶sthetic to her ... but she would not consent. All that I do
_gratis_--_anamatyer_ (_en amateur_). I'm used to it, though; you see,
I'm a plebeian, _homo novus_--not one of the old stock, not like my
spouse.... Wouldn't you like to come this way into the shade, to
breathe the morning freshness a little before tea?'

Arkady went out to him.

'Welcome once again,' said Vassily Ivanovitch, raising his hand in a
military salute to the greasy skull-cap which covered his head. 'You, I
know, are accustomed to luxury, to amusements, but even the great ones
of this world do not disdain to spend a brief space under a cottage
roof.'

'Good heavens,' protested Arkady, 'as though I were one of the great
ones of this world! And I'm not accustomed to luxury.'

'Pardon me, pardon me,' rejoined Vassily Ivanovitch with a polite
simper. 'Though I am laid on the shelf now, I have knocked about the
world too--I can tell a bird by its flight. I am something of a
psychologist too in my own way, and a physiognomist. If I had not, I
will venture to say, been endowed with that gift, I should have come to
grief long ago; I should have stood no chance, a poor man like me. I
tell you without flattery, I am sincerely delighted at the friendship I
observe between you and my son. I have just seen him; he got up as he
usually does--no doubt you are aware of it--very early, and went a
ramble about the neighbourhood. Permit me to inquire--have you known my
son long?'

'Since last winter.'

'Indeed. And permit me to question you further--but hadn't we better
sit down? Permit me, as a father, to ask without reserve, What is your
opinion of my Yevgeny?'

'Your son is one of the most remarkable men I have ever met,' Arkady
answered emphatically.

Vassily Ivanovitch's eyes suddenly grew round, and his cheeks were
suffused with a faint flush. The spade fell out of his hand.

'And so you expect,' he began ...

'I'm convinced,' Arkady put in, 'that your son has a great future
before him; that he will do honour to your name. I've been certain of
that ever since I first met him.'

'How ... how was that?' Vassily Ivanovitch articulated with an effort.
His wide mouth was relaxed in a triumphant smile, which would not leave
it.

'Would you like me to tell you how we met?'

'Yes ... and altogether....'

Arkady began to tell his tale, and to talk of Bazarov with even greater
warmth, even greater enthusiasm than he had done on the evening when he
danced a mazurka with Madame Odintsov.

Vassily Ivanovitch listened and listened, blinked, and rolled his
handkerchief up into a ball in both his hands, cleared his throat,
ruffled up his hair, and at last could stand it no longer; he bent down
to Arkady and kissed him on his shoulder. 'You have made me perfectly
happy,' he said, never ceasing to smile. 'I ought to tell you, I ...
idolise my son; my old wife I won't speak of--we all know what mothers
are!--but I dare not show my feelings before him, because he doesn't
like it. He is averse to every kind of demonstration of feeling; many
people even find fault with him for such firmness of character, and
regard it as a proof of pride or lack of feeling, but men like him
ought not to be judged by the common standard, ought they? And here,
for example, many another fellow in his place would have been a
constant drag on his parents; but he, would you believe it? has never
from the day he was born taken a farthing more than he could help,
that's God's truth!'

'He is a disinterested, honest man,' observed Arkady.

'Exactly so; he is disinterested. And I don't only idolise him, Arkady
Nikolaitch, I am proud of him, and the height of my ambition is that
some day there will be the following lines in his biography: "The son
of a simple army-doctor, who was, however, capable of divining his
greatness betimes, and spared nothing for his education ..."' The old
man's voice broke.

Arkady pressed his hand.

'What do you think,' inquired Vassily Ivanovitch, after a short
silence, 'will it be in the career of medicine that he will attain the
celebrity you anticipate for him?'

'Of course, not in medicine, though even in that department he will be
one of the leading scientific men.'

'In what then, Arkady Nikolaitch?'

'It would he hard to say now, but he will be famous.'

'He will be famous!' repeated the old man, and he sank into a reverie.

'Arina Vlasyevna sent me to call you in to tea,' announced Anfisushka,
coming by with an immense dish of ripe raspberries.

Vassily Ivanovitch started. 'And will there be cooled cream for the
raspberries?'

'Yes.'

'Cold now, mind! Don't stand on ceremony, Arkady Nikolaitch; take some
more. How is it Yevgeny doesn't come?'

'I'm here,' was heard Bazarov's voice from Arkady's room.

Vassily Ivanovitch turned round quickly. 'Aha! you wanted to pay a
visit to your friend; but you were too late, _amice_, and we have
already had a long conversation with him. Now we must go in to tea,
mother summons us. By the way, I want to have a little talk with you.'

'What about?'

'There's a peasant here; he's suffering from icterus....

'You mean jaundice?'

'Yes, a chronic and very obstinate case of icterus. I have prescribed
him centaury and St. John's wort, ordered him to eat carrots, given him
soda; but all that's merely palliative measures; we want some more
decided treatment. Though you do laugh at medicine, I am certain you
can give me practical advice. But we will talk of that later. Now come
in to tea.'

Vassily Ivanovitch jumped up briskly from the garden seat, and hummed
from _Robert le Diable_--

  'The rule, the rule we set ourselves,
   To live, to live for pleasure!'

'Singular vitality!' observed Bazarov, going away from the window.

It was midday. The sun was burning hot behind a thin veil of unbroken
whitish clouds. Everything was hushed; there was no sound but the cocks
crowing irritably at one another in the village, producing in every one
who heard them a strange sense of drowsiness and ennui; and somewhere,
high up in a tree-top, the incessant plaintive cheep of a young hawk.
Arkady and Bazarov lay in the shade of a small haystack, putting under
themselves two armfuls of dry and rustling, but still greenish and
fragrant grass.

'That aspen-tree,' began Bazarov, 'reminds me of my childhood; it grows
at the edge of the clay-pits where the bricks were dug, and in those
days I believed firmly that that clay-pit and aspen-tree possessed a
peculiar talismanic power; I never felt dull near them. I did not
understand then that I was not dull, because I was a child. Well, now
I'm grown up, the talisman's lost its power.'

'How long did you live here altogether?' asked Arkady.

'Two years on end; then we travelled about. We led a roving life,
wandering from town to town for the most part.'

'And has this house been standing long?'

'Yes. My grandfather built it--my mother's father.'

'Who was he--your grandfather?'

'Devil knows. Some second-major. He served with Suvorov, and was always
telling stories about the crossing of the Alps--inventions probably.'

'You have a portrait of Suvorov hanging in the drawing-room. I like
these dear little houses like yours; they're so warm and old-fashioned;
and there's always a special sort of scent about them.'

'A smell of lamp-oil and clover,' Bazarov remarked, yawning. 'And the
flies in those dear little houses.... Faugh!'

'Tell me,' began Arkady, after a brief pause, 'were they strict with
you when you were a child?'

'You can see what my parents are like. They're not a severe sort.'

'Are you fond of them, Yevgeny?'

'I am, Arkady.'

'How fond they are of you!'

Bazarov was silent for a little. 'Do you know what I'm thinking about?'
he brought out at last, clasping his hands behind his head.

'No. What is it?'

'I'm thinking life is a happy thing for my parents. My father at sixty
is fussing around, talking about "palliative" measures, doctoring
people, playing the bountiful master with the peasants--having a
festive time, in fact; and my mother's happy too; her day's so chockful
of duties of all sorts, and sighs and groans that she's no time even to
think of herself; while I ...'

'While you?'

'I think; here I lie under a haystack.... The tiny space I occupy is so
infinitely small in comparison with the rest of space, in which I am
not, and which has nothing to do with me; and the period of time in
which it is my lot to live is so petty beside the eternity in which I
have not been, and shall not be.... And in this atom, this mathematical
point, the blood is circulating, the brain is working and wanting
something.... Isn't it loathsome? Isn't it petty?'

'Allow me to remark that what you're saying applies to men in general.'

'You are right,' Bazarov cut in. 'I was going to say that they now--my
parents, I mean--are absorbed and don't trouble themselves about their
own nothingness; it doesn't sicken them ... while I ... I feel nothing
but weariness and anger.'

'Anger? why anger?'

'Why? How can you ask why? Have you forgotten?'

'I remember everything, but still I don't admit that you have any right
to be angry. You're unlucky, I'll allow, but ...'

'Pooh! then you, Arkady Nikolaevitch, I can see, regard love like all
modern young men; cluck, cluck, cluck you call to the hen, but if the
hen comes near you, you run away. I'm not like that. But that's enough
of that. What can't be helped, it's shameful to talk about.' He turned
over on his side. 'Aha! there goes a valiant ant dragging off a
half-dead fly. Take her, brother, take her! Don't pay attention to her
resistance; it's your privilege as an animal to be free from the
sentiment of pity--make the most of it--not like us conscientious
self-destructive animals!'

'You shouldn't say that, Yevgeny! When have you destroyed yourself?'

Bazarov raised his head. 'That's the only thing I pride myself on. I
haven't crushed myself, so a woman can't crush me. Amen! It's all over!
You shall not hear another word from me about it.'

Both the friends lay for some time in silence.

'Yes,' began Bazarov, 'man's a strange animal. When one gets a side
view from a distance of the dead-alive life our "fathers" lead here,
one thinks, What could be better? You eat and drink, and know you are
acting in the most reasonable, most judicious manner. But if not,
you're devoured by ennui. One wants to have to do with people if only
to abuse them.'

'One ought so to order one's life that every moment in it should be of
significance,' Arkady affirmed reflectively.

'I dare say! What's of significance is sweet, however mistaken; one
could make up one's mind to what's insignificant even. But pettiness,
pettiness, that's what's insufferable.'

'Pettiness doesn't exist for a man so long as he refuses to recognise
it.'

'H'm ... what you've just said is a common-place reversed.'

'What? What do you mean by that term?'

'I'll tell you; saying, for instance, that education is beneficial,
that's a common-place; but to say that education is injurious, that's a
common-place turned upside down. There's more style about it, so to
say, but in reality it's one and the same.'

'And the truth is--where, which side?'

'Where? Like an echo I answer, Where?'

'You're in a melancholy mood to-day, Yevgeny.'

'Really? The sun must have softened my brain, I suppose, and I can't
stand so many raspberries either.'

'In that case, a nap's not a bad thing,' observed Arkady.

'Certainly; only don't look at me; every man's face is stupid when he's
asleep.'

'But isn't it all the same to you what people think of you?'

'I don't know what to say to you. A real man ought not to care; a real
man is one whom it's no use thinking about, whom one must either obey
or hate.'

'It's funny! I don't hate anybody,' observed Arkady, after a moment's
thought.

'And I hate so many. You are a soft-hearted, mawkish creature; how
could you hate any one?... You're timid; you don't rely on yourself
much.'

'And you,' interrupted Arkady, 'do you expect much of yourself? Have
you a high opinion of yourself?'

Bazarov paused. 'When I meet a man who can hold his own beside me,' he
said, dwelling on every syllable, 'then I'll change my opinion of
myself. Yes, hatred! You said, for instance, to-day as we passed our
bailiff Philip's cottage--it's the one that's so nice and clean--well,
you said, Russia will come to perfection when the poorest peasant has a
house like that, and every one of us ought to work to bring it
about.... And I felt such a hatred for this poorest peasant, this
Philip or Sidor, for whom I'm to be ready to jump out of my skin, and
who won't even thank me for it ... and why should he thank me? Why,
suppose he does live in a clean house, while the nettles are growing
out of me,--well what do I gain by it?'

'Hush, Yevgeny ... if one listened to you to-day one would be driven to
agreeing with those who reproach us for want of principles.'

'You talk like your uncle. There are no general principles--you've not
made out that even yet! There are feelings. Everything depends on
them.'

'How so?'

'Why, I, for instance, take up a negative attitude, by virtue of my
sensations; I like to deny--my brain's made on that plan, and that's
all about it! Why do I like chemistry? Why do you like apples?--by
virtue of our sensations. It's all the same thing. Deeper than that men
will never penetrate. Not every one will tell you that, and, in fact, I
shan't tell you so another time.'

'What? and is honesty a matter of the senses?'

'I should rather think so.'

'Yevgeny!' Arkady was beginning in a dejected voice ...

'Well? What? Isn't it to your taste?' broke in Bazarov. 'No, brother.
If you've made up your mind to mow down everything, don't spare your
