gate, and heard a child's voice,--and suddenly my Henry broke away from
two or three men who were holding him, and ran, screaming, and caught
my dress. They came up to him, swearing dreadfully; and one man, whose
face I shall never forget, told him that he wouldn't get away so; that
he was going with him into the calaboose, and he'd get a lesson there
he'd never forget. I tried to beg and plead,--they only laughed; the
poor boy screamed and looked into my face, and held on to me, until, in
tearing him off, they tore the skirt of my dress half away; and they
carried him in, screaming 'Mother! mother! mother!' There was one man
stood there seemed to pity me. I offered him all the money I had, if
he'd only interfere. He shook his head, and said that the boy had been
impudent and disobedient, ever since he bought him; that he was going
to break him in, once for all. I turned and ran; and every step of the
way, I thought that I heard him scream. I got into the house; ran, all
out of breath, to the parlor, where I found Butler. I told him, and
begged him to go and interfere. He only laughed, and told me the boy
had got his deserts. He'd got to be broken in,--the sooner the better;
'what did I expect?' he asked.

"It seemed to me something in my head snapped, at that moment. I felt
dizzy and furious. I remember seeing a great sharp bowie-knife on the
table; I remember something about catching it, and flying upon him; and
then all grew dark, and I didn't know any more,--not for days and days.

"When I came to myself, I was in a nice room,--but not mine. An old
black woman tended me; and a doctor came to see me, and there was a
great deal of care taken of me. After a while, I found that he had gone
away, and left me at this house to be sold; and that's why they took
such pains with me.

"I didn't mean to get well, and hoped I shouldn't; but, in spite of me
the fever went off and I grew healthy, and finally got up. Then, they
made me dress up, every day; and gentlemen used to come in and stand
and smoke their cigars, and look at me, and ask questions, and debate
my price. I was so gloomy and silent, that none of them wanted me. They
threatened to whip me, if I wasn't gayer, and didn't take some pains
to make myself agreeable. At length, one day, came a gentleman named
Stuart. He seemed to have some feeling for me; he saw that something
dreadful was on my heart, and he came to see me alone, a great many
times, and finally persuaded me to tell him. He bought me, at last, and
promised to do all he could to find and buy back my children. He went
to the hotel where my Henry was; they told him he had been sold to a
planter up on Pearl River; that was the last that I ever heard. Then he
found where my daughter was; an old woman was keeping her. He offered an
immense sum for her, but they would not sell her. Butler found out that
it was for me he wanted her; and he sent me word that I should never
have her. Captain Stuart was very kind to me; he had a splendid
plantation, and took me to it. In the course of a year, I had a son
born. O, that child!--how I loved it! How just like my poor Henry the
little thing looked! But I had made up my mind,--yes, I had. I would
never again let a child live to grow up! I took the little fellow in my
arms, when he was two weeks old, and kissed him, and cried over him; and
then I gave him laudanum, and held him close to my bosom, while he slept
to death. How I mourned and cried over it! and who ever dreamed that it
was anything but a mistake, that had made me give it the laudanum? but
it's one of the few things that I'm glad of, now. I am not sorry, to
this day; he, at least, is out of pain. What better than death could
I give him, poor child! After a while, the cholera came, and Captain
Stuart died; everybody died that wanted to live,--and I,--I, though I
went down to death's door,--_I lived!_ Then I was sold, and passed from
hand to hand, till I grew faded and wrinkled, and I had a fever; and
then this wretch bought me, and brought me here,--and here I am!"

The woman stopped. She had hurried on through her story, with a wild,
passionate utterance; sometimes seeming to address it to Tom, and
sometimes speaking as in a soliloquy. So vehement and overpowering was
the force with which she spoke, that, for a season, Tom was beguiled
even from the pain of his wounds, and, raising himself on one elbow,
watched her as she paced restlessly up and down, her long black hair
swaying heavily about her, as she moved.

"You tell me," she said, after a pause, "that there is a God,--a God
that looks down and sees all these things. May be it's so. The sisters
in the convent used to tell me of a day of judgment, when everything is
coming to light;--won't there be vengeance, then!

"They think it's nothing, what we suffer,--nothing, what our children
suffer! It's all a small matter; yet I've walked the streets when it
seemed as if I had misery enough in my one heart to sink the city. I've
wished the houses would fall on me, or the stones sink under me. Yes!
and, in the judgment day, I will stand up before God, a witness against
those that have ruined me and my children, body and soul!

"When I was a girl, I thought I was religious; I used to love God and
prayer. Now, I'm a lost soul, pursued by devils that torment me day
and night; they keep pushing me on and on--and I'll do it, too, some of
these days!" she said, clenching her hand, while an insane light glanced
in her heavy black eyes. "I'll send him where he belongs,--a short way,
too,--one of these nights, if they burn me alive for it!" A wild, long
laugh rang through the deserted room, and ended in a hysteric sob; she
threw herself on the floor, in convulsive sobbing and struggles.

In a few moments, the frenzy fit seemed to pass off; she rose slowly,
and seemed to collect herself.

"Can I do anything more for you, my poor fellow?" she said, approaching
where Tom lay; "shall I give you some more water?"

There was a graceful and compassionate sweetness in her voice and
manner, as she said this, that formed a strange contrast with the former
wildness.

Tom drank the water, and looked earnestly and pitifully into her face.

"O, Missis, I wish you'd go to him that can give you living waters!"

"Go to him! Where is he? Who is he?" said Cassy.

"Him that you read of to me,--the Lord."

"I used to see the picture of him, over the altar, when I was a girl,"
said Cassy, her dark eyes fixing themselves in an expression of mournful
reverie; "but, _he isn't here!_ there's nothing here, but sin and long,
long, long despair! O!" She laid her hand on her breast and drew in her
breath, as if to lift a heavy weight.

Tom looked as if he would speak again; but she cut him short, with a
decided gesture.

"Don't talk, my poor fellow. Try to sleep, if you can." And, placing
water in his reach, and making whatever little arrangements for his
comforts she could, Cassy left the shed.




The Tokens

     "And slight, withal, may be the things that bring
     Back on the heart the weight which it would fling
     Aside forever; it may be a sound,
     A flower, the wind, the ocean, which shall wound,--
     Striking the electric chain wherewith we're darkly bound."
     CHILDE HAROLD'S PILGRIMAGE, CAN. 4.

The sitting-room of Legree's establishment was a large, long room,
with a wide, ample fireplace. It had once been hung with a showy and
expensive paper, which now hung mouldering, torn and discolored, from
the damp walls. The place had that peculiar sickening, unwholesome
smell, compounded of mingled damp, dirt and decay, which one often
notices in close old houses. The wall-paper was defaced, in spots, by
slops of beer and wine; or garnished with chalk memorandums, and long
sums footed up, as if somebody had been practising arithmetic there. In
the fireplace stood a brazier full of burning charcoal; for, though the
weather was not cold, the evenings always seemed damp and chilly in that
great room; and Legree, moreover, wanted a place to light his cigars,
and heat his water for punch. The ruddy glare of the charcoal displayed
the confused and unpromising aspect of the room,--saddles, bridles,
several sorts of harness, riding-whips, overcoats, and various articles
of clothing, scattered up and down the room in confused variety; and the
dogs, of whom we have before spoken, had encamped themselves among them,
to suit their own taste and convenience.

Legree was just mixing himself a tumbler of punch, pouring his hot water
from a cracked and broken-nosed pitcher, grumbling, as he did so,

"Plague on that Sambo, to kick up this yer row between me and the new
hands! The fellow won't be fit to work for a week, now,--right in the
press of the season!"

"Yes, just like you," said a voice, behind his chair. It was the woman
Cassy, who had stolen upon his soliloquy.

"Hah! you she-devil! you've come back, have you?"

"Yes, I have," she said, coolly; "come to have my own way, too!"

"You lie, you jade! I'll be up to my word. Either behave yourself, or
stay down to the quarters, and fare and work with the rest."

"I'd rather, ten thousand times," said the woman, "live in the dirtiest
hole at the quarters, than be under your hoof!"

"But you _are_ under my hoof, for all that," said he, turning upon her,
with a savage grin; "that's one comfort. So, sit down here on my knee,
my dear, and hear to reason," said he, laying hold on her wrist.

"Simon Legree, take care!" said the woman, with a sharp flash of her
eye, a glance so wild and insane in its light as to be almost appalling.
"You're afraid of me, Simon," she said, deliberately; "and you've reason
to be! But be careful, for I've got the devil in me!"

The last words she whispered in a hissing tone, close to his ear.

"Get out! I believe, to my soul, you have!" said Legree, pushing her
from him, and looking uncomfortably at her. "After all, Cassy," he said,
"why can't you be friends with me, as you used to?"

"Used to!" said she, bitterly. She stopped short,--a word of choking
feelings, rising in her heart, kept her silent.

Cassy had always kept over Legree the kind of influence that a strong,
impassioned woman can ever keep over the most brutal man; but, of late,
she had grown more and more irritable and restless, under the hideous
yoke of her servitude, and her irritability, at times, broke out into
raving insanity; and this liability made her a sort of object of dread
to Legree, who had that superstitious horror of insane persons which is
common to coarse and uninstructed minds. When Legree brought Emmeline to
the house, all the smouldering embers of womanly feeling flashed up in
the worn heart of Cassy, and she took part with the girl; and a fierce
quarrel ensued between her and Legree. Legree, in a fury, swore she
should be put to field service, if she would not be peaceable. Cassy,
with proud scorn, declared she _would_ go to the field. And she worked
there one day, as we have described, to show how perfectly she scorned
the threat.

Legree was secretly uneasy, all day; for Cassy had an influence over him
from which he could not free himself. When she presented her basket at
the scales, he had hoped for some concession, and addressed her in a
sort of half conciliatory, half scornful tone; and she had answered with
the bitterest contempt.

The outrageous treatment of poor Tom had roused her still more; and she
had followed Legree to the house, with no particular intention, but to
upbraid him for his brutality.

"I wish, Cassy," said Legree, "you'd behave yourself decently."

"_You_ talk about behaving decently! And what have you been doing?--you,
who haven't even sense enough to keep from spoiling one of your best
hands, right in the most pressing season, just for your devilish
temper!"

"I was a fool, it's a fact, to let any such brangle come up," said
Legree; "but, when the boy set up his will, he had to be broke in."

"I reckon you won't break _him_ in!"

"Won't I?" said Legree, rising, passionately. "I'd like to know if I
won't? He'll be the first nigger that ever came it round me! I'll break
every bone in his body, but he _shall_ give up!"

Just then the door opened, and Sambo entered. He came forward, bowing,
and holding out something in a paper.

"What's that, you dog?" said Legree.

"It's a witch thing, Mas'r!"

"A what?"

"Something that niggers gets from witches. Keeps 'em from feelin' when
they 's flogged. He had it tied round his neck, with a black string."

Legree, like most godless and cruel men, was superstitious. He took the
paper, and opened it uneasily.

There dropped out of it a silver dollar, and a long, shining curl
of fair hair,--hair which, like a living thing, twined itself round
Legree's fingers.

"Damnation!" he screamed, in sudden passion, stamping on the floor, and
pulling furiously at the hair, as if it burned him. "Where did this come
from? Take it off!--burn it up!--burn it up!" he screamed, tearing it
off, and throwing it into the charcoal. "What did you bring it to me
for?"

Sambo stood, with his heavy mouth wide open, and aghast with wonder; and
Cassy, who was preparing to leave the apartment, stopped, and looked at
him in perfect amazement.

"Don't you bring me any more of your devilish things!" said he, shaking
his fist at Sambo, who retreated hastily towards the door; and, picking
up the silver dollar, he sent it smashing through the window-pane, out
into the darkness.

Sambo was glad to make his escape. When he was gone, Legree seemed a
little ashamed of his fit of alarm. He sat doggedly down in his chair,
and began sullenly sipping his tumbler of punch.

Cassy prepared herself for going out, unobserved by him; and slipped
away to minister to poor Tom, as we have already related.

And what was the matter with Legree? and what was there in a simple
curl of fair hair to appall that brutal man, familiar with every form
of cruelty? To answer this, we must carry the reader backward in his
history. Hard and reprobate as the godless man seemed now, there had
been a time when he had been rocked on the bosom of a mother,--cradled
with prayers and pious hymns,--his now seared brow bedewed with the
waters of holy baptism. In early childhood, a fair-haired woman had led
him, at the sound of Sabbath bell, to worship and to pray. Far in New
England that mother had trained her only son, with long, unwearied love,
and patient prayers. Born of a hard-tempered sire, on whom that gentle
woman had wasted a world of unvalued love, Legree had followed in the
steps of his father. Boisterous, unruly, and tyrannical, he despised all
her counsel, and would none of her reproof; and, at an early age, broke
from her, to seek his fortunes at sea. He never came home but once,
after; and then, his mother, with the yearning of a heart that must love
something, and has nothing else to love, clung to him, and sought, with
passionate prayers and entreaties, to win him from a life of sin, to his
soul's eternal good.

That was Legree's day of grace; then good angels called him; then he
was almost persuaded, and mercy held him by the hand. His heart inly
relented,--there was a conflict,--but sin got the victory, and he
set all the force of his rough nature against the conviction of his
conscience. He drank and swore,--was wilder and more brutal than ever.
And, one night, when his mother, in the last agony of her despair, knelt
at his feet, he spurned her from him,--threw her senseless on the floor,
and, with brutal curses, fled to his ship. The next Legree heard of
his mother was, when, one night, as he was carousing among drunken
companions, a letter was put into his hand. He opened it, and a lock
of long, curling hair fell from it, and twined about his fingers. The
letter told him his mother was dead, and that, dying, she blest and
forgave him.

There is a dread, unhallowed necromancy of evil, that turns things
sweetest and holiest to phantoms of horror and affright. That pale,
loving mother,--her dying prayers, her forgiving love,--wrought in that
demoniac heart of sin only as a damning sentence, bringing with it a
fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation. Legree burned the
hair, and burned the letter; and when he saw them hissing and crackling
in the flame, inly shuddered as he thought of everlasting fires. He
tried to drink, and revel, and swear away the memory; but often, in
the deep night, whose solemn stillness arraigns the bad soul in forced
communion with herself, he had seen that pale mother rising by his
bedside, and felt the soft twining of that hair around his fingers, till
the cold sweat would roll down his face, and he would spring from his
bed in horror. Ye who have wondered to hear, in the same evangel, that
God is love, and that God is a consuming fire, see ye not how, to the
soul resolved in evil, perfect love is the most fearful torture, the
seal and sentence of the direst despair?

"Blast it!" said Legree to himself, as he sipped his liquor; "where did
he get that? If it didn't look just like--whoo! I thought I'd forgot
that. Curse me, if I think there's any such thing as forgetting
anything, any how,--hang it! I'm lonesome! I mean to call Em. She hates
me--the monkey! I don't care,--I'll _make_ her come!"

Legree stepped out into a large entry, which went up stairs, by what had
formerly been a superb winding staircase; but the passage-way was dirty
and dreary, encumbered with boxes and unsightly litter. The stairs,
uncarpeted, seemed winding up, in the gloom, to nobody knew where! The
pale moonlight streamed through a shattered fanlight over the door; the
air was unwholesome and chilly, like that of a vault.

Legree stopped at the foot of the stairs, and heard a voice singing. It
seemed strange and ghostlike in that dreary old house, perhaps because
of the already tremulous state of his nerves. Hark! what is it?

A wild, pathetic voice, chants a hymn common among the slaves:

     "O there'll be mourning, mourning, mourning,
     O there'll be mourning, at the judgment-seat of Christ!"

"Blast the girl!" said Legree. "I'll choke her.--Em! Em!" he called,
harshly; but only a mocking echo from the walls answered him. The sweet
voice still sung on:

     "Parents and children there shall part!
     Parents and children there shall part!
     Shall part to meet no more!"

And clear and loud swelled through the empty halls the refrain,

     "O there'll be mourning, mourning, mourning,
     O there'll be mourning, at the judgment-seat of Christ!"

Legree stopped. He would have been ashamed to tell of it, but large
drops of sweat stood on his forehead, his heart beat heavy and thick
with fear; he even thought he saw something white rising and glimmering
in the gloom before him, and shuddered to think what if the form of his
dead mother should suddenly appear to him.

"I know one thing," he said to himself, as he stumbled back in the
sitting-room, and sat down; "I'll let that fellow alone, after this!
What did I want of his cussed paper? I b'lieve I am bewitched, sure
enough! I've been shivering and sweating, ever since! Where did he get
that hair? It couldn't have been _that!_ I burnt _that_ up, I know I
did! It would be a joke, if hair could rise from the dead!"

Ah, Legree! that golden tress _was_ charmed; each hair had in it a spell
of terror and remorse for thee, and was used by a mightier power to bind
thy cruel hands from inflicting uttermost evil on the helpless!

"I say," said Legree, stamping and whistling to the dogs, "wake up, some
of you, and keep me company!" but the dogs only opened one eye at him,
sleepily, and closed it again.

"I'll have Sambo and Quimbo up here, to sing and dance one of their hell
dances, and keep off these horrid notions," said Legree; and, putting
on his hat, he went on to the verandah, and blew a horn, with which he
commonly summoned his two sable drivers.

Legree was often wont, when in a gracious humor, to get these two
worthies into his sitting-room, and, after warming them up with whiskey,
amuse himself by setting them to singing, dancing or fighting, as the
humor took him.

It was between one and two o'clock at night, as Cassy was returning
from her ministrations to poor Tom, that she heard the sound of wild
shrieking, whooping, halloing, and singing, from the sitting-room,
mingled with the barking of dogs, and other symptoms of general uproar.

She came up on the verandah steps, and looked in. Legree and both the
drivers, in a state of furious intoxication, were singing, whooping,
upsetting chairs, and making all manner of ludicrous and horrid grimaces
at each other.

She rested her small, slender hand on the window-blind, and looked
fixedly at them;--there was a world of anguish, scorn, and fierce
bitterness, in her black eyes, as she did so. "Would it be a sin to rid
the world of such a wretch?" she said to herself.

She turned hurriedly away, and, passing round to a back door, glided up
stairs, and tapped at Emmeline's door.




Emmeline and Cassy


Cassy entered the room, and found Emmeline sitting, pale with fear,
in the furthest corner of it. As she came in, the girl started up
nervously; but, on seeing who it was, rushed forward, and catching her
arm, said, "O Cassy, is it you? I'm so glad you've come! I was afraid
it was--. O, you don't know what a horrid noise there has been, down
stairs, all this evening!"

"I ought to know," said Cassy, dryly. "I've heard it often enough."

"O Cassy! do tell me,--couldn't we get away from this place? I don't
care where,--into the swamp among the snakes,--anywhere! _Couldn't_ we
get _somewhere_ away from here?"

"Nowhere, but into our graves," said Cassy.

"Did you ever try?"

"I've seen enough of trying and what comes of it," said Cassy.

"I'd be willing to live in the swamps, and gnaw the bark from trees.
I an't afraid of snakes! I'd rather have one near me than him," said
Emmeline, eagerly.

"There have been a good many here of your opinion," said Cassy; "but you
couldn't stay in the swamps,--you'd be tracked by the dogs, and brought
back, and then--then--"

"What would he do?" said the girl, looking, with breathless interest,
into her face.

"What _wouldn't_ he do, you'd better ask," said Cassy. "He's learned
his trade well, among the pirates in the West Indies. You wouldn't sleep
much, if I should tell you things I've seen,--things that he tells of,
sometimes, for good jokes. I've heard screams here that I haven't been
able to get out of my head for weeks and weeks. There's a place way out
down by the quarters, where you can see a black, blasted tree, and the
ground all covered with black ashes. Ask anyone what was done there, and
see if they will dare to tell you."

"O! what do you mean?"

"I won't tell you. I hate to think of it. And I tell you, the Lord only
knows what we may see tomorrow, if that poor fellow holds out as he's
begun."

"Horrid!" said Emmeline, every drop of blood receding from her cheeks.
"O, Cassy, do tell me what I shall do!"

"What I've done. Do the best you can,--do what you must,--and make it up
in hating and cursing."

"He wanted to make me drink some of his hateful brandy," said Emmeline;
"and I hate it so--"

"You'd better drink," said Cassy. "I hated it, too; and now I can't live
without it. One must have something;--things don't look so dreadful,
when you take that."

"Mother used to tell me never to touch any such thing," said Emmeline.

"_Mother_ told you!" said Cassy, with a thrilling and bitter emphasis
on the word mother. "What use is it for mothers to say anything? You
are all to be bought and paid for, and your souls belong to whoever gets
you. That's the way it goes. I say, _drink_ brandy; drink all you can,
and it'll make things come easier."

"O, Cassy! do pity me!"

"Pity you!--don't I? Haven't I a daughter,--Lord knows where she is,
and whose she is, now,--going the way her mother went, before her, I
suppose, and that her children must go, after her! There's no end to the
curse--forever!"

"I wish I'd never been born!" said Emmeline, wringing her hands.

"That's an old wish with me," said Cassy. "I've got used to wishing
that. I'd die, if I dared to," she said, looking out into the darkness,
with that still, fixed despair which was the habitual expression of her
face when at rest.

"It would be wicked to kill one's self," said Emmeline.

"I don't know why,--no wickeder than things we live and do, day after
day. But the sisters told me things, when I was in the convent, that
make me afraid to die. If it would only be the end of us, why, then--"

Emmeline turned away, and hid her face in her hands.
