When Legree returned, baffled and disappointed, all the long-working
hatred of his soul towards his slave began to gather in a deadly and
desperate form. Had not this man braved him,--steadily, powerfully,
resistlessly,--ever since he bought him? Was there not a spirit in him
which, silent as it was, burned on him like the fires of perdition?

"I _hate_ him!" said Legree, that night, as he sat up in his bed; "I
_hate_ him! And isn't he MINE? Can't I do what I like with him? Who's to
hinder, I wonder?" And Legree clenched his fist, and shook it, as if he
had something in his hands that he could rend in pieces.

But, then, Tom was a faithful, valuable servant; and, although Legree
hated him the more for that, yet the consideration was still somewhat of
a restraint to him.

The next morning, he determined to say nothing, as yet; to assemble
a party, from some neighboring plantations, with dogs and guns;
to surround the swamp, and go about the hunt systematically. If it
succeeded, well and good; if not, he would summon Tom before him,
and--his teeth clenched and his blood boiled--_then_ he would break
the fellow down, or--there was a dire inward whisper, to which his soul
assented.

Ye say that the _interest_ of the master is a sufficient safeguard for
the slave. In the fury of man's mad will, he will wittingly, and with
open eye, sell his own soul to the devil to gain his ends; and will he
be more careful of his neighbor's body?

"Well," said Cassy, the next day, from the garret, as she reconnoitred
through the knot-hole, "the hunt's going to begin again, today!"

Three or four mounted horsemen were curvetting about, on the space
in front of the house; and one or two leashes of strange dogs were
struggling with the negroes who held them, baying and barking at each
other.

The men are, two of them, overseers of plantations in the vicinity;
and others were some of Legree's associates at the tavern-bar of a
neighboring city, who had come for the interest of the sport. A more
hard-favored set, perhaps, could not be imagined. Legree was serving
brandy, profusely, round among them, as also among the negroes, who had
been detailed from the various plantations for this service; for it was
an object to make every service of this kind, among the negroes, as much
of a holiday as possible.

Cassy placed her ear at the knot-hole; and, as the morning air blew
directly towards the house, she could overhear a good deal of the
conversation. A grave sneer overcast the dark, severe gravity of her
face, as she listened, and heard them divide out the ground, discuss the
rival merits of the dogs, give orders about firing, and the treatment of
each, in case of capture.

Cassy drew back; and, clasping her hands, looked upward, and said, "O,
great Almighty God! we are _all_ sinners; but what have _we_ done, more
than all the rest of the world, that we should be treated so?"

There was a terrible earnestness in her face and voice, as she spoke.

"If it wasn't for _you_, child," she said, looking at Emmeline, "I'd
_go_ out to them; and I'd thank any one of them that _would_ shoot
me down; for what use will freedom be to me? Can it give me back my
children, or make me what I used to be?"

Emmeline, in her child-like simplicity, was half afraid of the dark
moods of Cassy. She looked perplexed, but made no answer. She only took
her hand, with a gentle, caressing movement.

"Don't!" said Cassy, trying to draw it away; "you'll get me to loving
you; and I never mean to love anything, again!"

"Poor Cassy!" said Emmeline, "don't feel so! If the Lord gives us
liberty, perhaps he'll give you back your daughter; at any rate, I'll be
like a daughter to you. I know I'll never see my poor old mother again!
I shall love you, Cassy, whether you love me or not!"

The gentle, child-like spirit conquered. Cassy sat down by her, put
her arm round her neck, stroked her soft, brown hair; and Emmeline then
wondered at the beauty of her magnificent eyes, now soft with tears.

"O, Em!" said Cassy, "I've hungered for my children, and thirsted for
them, and my eyes fail with longing for them! Here! here!" she said,
striking her breast, "it's all desolate, all empty! If God would give me
back my children, then I could pray."

"You must trust him, Cassy," said Emmeline; "he is our Father!"

"His wrath is upon us," said Cassy; "he has turned away in anger."

"No, Cassy! He will be good to us! Let us hope in Him," said
Emmeline,--"I always have had hope."


The hunt was long, animated, and thorough, but unsuccessful; and, with
grave, ironic exultation, Cassy looked down on Legree, as, weary and
dispirited, he alighted from his horse.

"Now, Quimbo," said Legree, as he stretched himself down in the
sitting-room, "you jest go and walk that Tom up here, right away! The
old cuss is at the bottom of this yer whole matter; and I'll have it out
of his old black hide, or I'll know the reason why!"

Sambo and Quimbo, both, though hating each other, were joined in one
mind by a no less cordial hatred of Tom. Legree had told them, at first,
that he had bought him for a general overseer, in his absence; and this
had begun an ill will, on their part, which had increased, in their
debased and servile natures, as they saw him becoming obnoxious to
their master's displeasure. Quimbo, therefore, departed, with a will, to
execute his orders.

Tom heard the message with a forewarning heart; for he knew all the
plan of the fugitives' escape, and the place of their present
concealment;--he knew the deadly character of the man he had to deal
with, and his despotic power. But he felt strong in God to meet death,
rather than betray the helpless.

He sat his basket down by the row, and, looking up, said, "Into thy
hands I commend my spirit! Thou hast redeemed me, oh Lord God of truth!"
and then quietly yielded himself to the rough, brutal grasp with which
Quimbo seized him.

"Ay, ay!" said the giant, as he dragged him along; "ye'll cotch it, now!
I'll boun' Mas'r's back 's up _high!_ No sneaking out, now! Tell ye,
ye'll get it, and no mistake! See how ye'll look, now, helpin' Mas'r's
niggers to run away! See what ye'll get!"

The savage words none of them reached that ear!--a higher voice there
was saying, "Fear not them that kill the body, and, after that, have no
more that they can do." Nerve and bone of that poor man's body vibrated
to those words, as if touched by the finger of God; and he felt the
strength of a thousand souls in one. As he passed along, the trees and
bushes, the huts of his servitude, the whole scene of his degradation,
seemed to whirl by him as the landscape by the rushing ear. His soul
throbbed,--his home was in sight,--and the hour of release seemed at
hand.

"Well, Tom!" said Legree, walking up, and seizing him grimly by the
collar of his coat, and speaking through his teeth, in a paroxysm of
determined rage, "do you know I've made up my mind to KILL YOU?"

"It's very likely, Mas'r," said Tom, calmly.

"I _have_," said Legree, with a grim, terrible calmness,
"_done--just--that--thing_, Tom, unless you'll tell me what you know
about these yer gals!"

Tom stood silent.

"D'ye hear?" said Legree, stamping, with a roar like that of an incensed
lion. "Speak!"

"_I han't got nothing to tell, Mas'r_," said Tom, with a slow, firm,
deliberate utterance.

"Do you dare to tell me, ye old black Christian, ye don't _know_?" said
Legree.

Tom was silent.

"Speak!" thundered Legree, striking him furiously. "Do you know
anything?"

"I know, Mas'r; but I can't tell anything. _I can die!_"

Legree drew in a long breath; and, suppressing his rage, took Tom by the
arm, and, approaching his face almost to his, said, in a terrible voice,
"Hark 'e, Tom!--ye think, 'cause I've let you off before, I don't mean
what I say; but, this time, _I've made up my mind_, and counted the
cost. You've always stood it out again' me: now, _I'll conquer ye, or
kill ye!_--one or t' other. I'll count every drop of blood there is in
you, and take 'em, one by one, till ye give up!"

Tom looked up to his master, and answered, "Mas'r, if you was sick,
or in trouble, or dying, and I could save ye, I'd _give_ ye my heart's
blood; and, if taking every drop of blood in this poor old body would
save your precious soul, I'd give 'em freely, as the Lord gave his for
me. O, Mas'r! don't bring this great sin on your soul! It will hurt you
more than 't will me! Do the worst you can, my troubles'll be over soon;
but, if ye don't repent, yours won't _never_ end!"

Like a strange snatch of heavenly music, heard in the lull of a tempest,
this burst of feeling made a moment's blank pause. Legree stood aghast,
and looked at Tom; and there was such a silence, that the tick of the
old clock could be heard, measuring, with silent touch, the last moments
of mercy and probation to that hardened heart.

It was but a moment. There was one hesitating pause,--one irresolute,
relenting thrill,--and the spirit of evil came back, with seven-fold
vehemence; and Legree, foaming with rage, smote his victim to the
ground.


Scenes of blood and cruelty are shocking to our ear and heart. What
man has nerve to do, man has not nerve to hear. What brother-man and
brother-Christian must suffer, cannot be told us, even in our secret
chamber, it so harrows the soul! And yet, oh my country! these things
are done under the shadow of thy laws! O, Christ! thy church sees them,
almost in silence!

But, of old, there was One whose suffering changed an instrument of
torture, degradation and shame, into a symbol of glory, honor, and
immortal life; and, where His spirit is, neither degrading stripes, nor
blood, nor insults, can make the Christian's last struggle less than
glorious.

Was he alone, that long night, whose brave, loving spirit was bearing
up, in that old shed, against buffeting and brutal stripes?

Nay! There stood by him ONE,--seen by him alone,--"like unto the Son of
God."

The tempter stood by him, too,--blinded by furious, despotic
will,--every moment pressing him to shun that agony by the betrayal of
the innocent. But the brave, true heart was firm on the Eternal Rock.
Like his Master, he knew that, if he saved others, himself he could not
save; nor could utmost extremity wring from him words, save of prayers
and holy trust.

"He's most gone, Mas'r," said Sambo, touched, in spite of himself, by
the patience of his victim.

"Pay away, till he gives up! Give it to him!--give it to him!" shouted
Legree. "I'll take every drop of blood he has, unless he confesses!"

Tom opened his eyes, and looked upon his master. "Ye poor miserable
critter!" he said, "there ain't no more ye can do! I forgive ye, with
all my soul!" and he fainted entirely away.

"I b'lieve, my soul, he's done for, finally," said Legree, stepping
forward, to look at him. "Yes, he is! Well, his mouth's shut up, at
last,--that's one comfort!"

Yes, Legree; but who shall shut up that voice in thy soul? that soul,
past repentance, past prayer, past hope, in whom the fire that never
shall be quenched is already burning!

Yet Tom was not quite gone. His wondrous words and pious prayers
had struck upon the hearts of the imbruted blacks, who had been the
instruments of cruelty upon him; and, the instant Legree withdrew,
they took him down, and, in their ignorance, sought to call him back to
life,--as if _that_ were any favor to him.

"Sartin, we 's been doin' a drefful wicked thing!" said Sambo; "hopes
Mas'r'll have to 'count for it, and not we."

They washed his wounds,--they provided a rude bed, of some refuse
cotton, for him to lie down on; and one of them, stealing up to the
house, begged a drink of brandy of Legree, pretending that he was tired,
and wanted it for himself. He brought it back, and poured it down Tom's
throat.

"O, Tom!" said Quimbo, "we's been awful wicked to ye!"

"I forgive ye, with all my heart!" said Tom, faintly.

"O, Tom! do tell us who is _Jesus_, anyhow?" said Sambo;--"Jesus, that's
been a standin' by you so, all this night!--Who is he?"

The word roused the failing, fainting spirit. He poured forth a few
energetic sentences of that wondrous One,--his life, his death, his
everlasting presence, and power to save.

They wept,--both the two savage men.

"Why didn't I never hear this before?" said Sambo; "but I do believe!--I
can't help it! Lord Jesus, have mercy on us!"

"Poor critters!" said Tom, "I'd be willing to bar all I have, if it'll
only bring ye to Christ! O, Lord! give me these two more souls, I pray!"

That prayer was answered!




The Young Master


Two days after, a young man drove a light wagon up through the avenue of
China trees, and, throwing the reins hastily on the horse's neck, sprang
out and inquired for the owner of the place.

It was George Shelby; and, to show how he came to be there, we must go
back in our story.

The letter of Miss Ophelia to Mrs. Shelby had, by some unfortunate
accident, been detained, for a month or two, at some remote post-office,
before it reached its destination; and, of course, before it was
received, Tom was already lost to view among the distant swamps of the
Red River.

Mrs. Shelby read the intelligence with the deepest concern; but
any immediate action upon it was an impossibility. She was then in
attendance on the sick-bed of her husband, who lay delirious in the
crisis of a fever. Master George Shelby, who, in the interval, had
changed from a boy to a tall young man, was her constant and faithful
assistant, and her only reliance in superintending his father's affairs.
Miss Ophelia had taken the precaution to send them the name of the
lawyer who did business for the St. Clares; and the most that, in the
emergency, could be done, was to address a letter of inquiry to him.
The sudden death of Mr. Shelby, a few days after, brought, of course, an
absorbing pressure of other interests, for a season.

Mr. Shelby showed his confidence in his wife's ability, by appointing
her sole executrix upon his estates; and thus immediately a large and
complicated amount of business was brought upon her hands.

Mrs. Shelby, with characteristic energy, applied herself to the work of
straightening the entangled web of affairs; and she and George were
for some time occupied with collecting and examining accounts, selling
property and settling debts; for Mrs. Shelby was determined that
everything should be brought into tangible and recognizable shape, let
the consequences to her prove what they might. In the mean time, they
received a letter from the lawyer to whom Miss Ophelia had referred
them, saying that he knew nothing of the matter; that the man was sold
at a public auction, and that, beyond receiving the money, he knew
nothing of the affair.

Neither George nor Mrs. Shelby could be easy at this result; and,
accordingly, some six months after, the latter, having business for his
mother, down the river, resolved to visit New Orleans, in person, and
push his inquiries, in hopes of discovering Tom's whereabouts, and
restoring him.

After some months of unsuccessful search, by the merest accident, George
fell in with a man, in New Orleans, who happened to be possessed of the
desired information; and with his money in his pocket, our hero took
steamboat for Red River, resolving to find out and re-purchase his old
friend.

He was soon introduced into the house, where he found Legree in the
sitting-room.

Legree received the stranger with a kind of surly hospitality,

"I understand," said the young man, "that you bought, in New Orleans, a
boy, named Tom. He used to be on my father's place, and I came to see if
I couldn't buy him back."

Legree's brow grew dark, and he broke out, passionately: "Yes, I did
buy such a fellow,--and a h--l of a bargain I had of it, too! The most
rebellious, saucy, impudent dog! Set up my niggers to run away; got off
two gals, worth eight hundred or a thousand apiece. He owned to that,
and, when I bid him tell me where they was, he up and said he knew,
but he wouldn't tell; and stood to it, though I gave him the cussedest
flogging I ever gave nigger yet. I b'lieve he's trying to die; but I
don't know as he'll make it out."

"Where is he?" said George, impetuously. "Let me see him." The cheeks of
the young man were crimson, and his eyes flashed fire; but he prudently
said nothing, as yet.

"He's in dat ar shed," said a little fellow, who stood holding George's
horse.

Legree kicked the boy, and swore at him; but George, without saying
another word, turned and strode to the spot.

Tom had been lying two days since the fatal night, not suffering, for
every nerve of suffering was blunted and destroyed. He lay, for the most
part, in a quiet stupor; for the laws of a powerful and well-knit frame
would not at once release the imprisoned spirit. By stealth, there had
been there, in the darkness of the night, poor desolated creatures, who
stole from their scanty hours' rest, that they might repay to him some
of those ministrations of love in which he had always been so abundant.
Truly, those poor disciples had little to give,--only the cup of cold
water; but it was given with full hearts.

Tears had fallen on that honest, insensible face,--tears of late
repentance in the poor, ignorant heathen, whom his dying love and
patience had awakened to repentance, and bitter prayers, breathed over
him to a late-found Saviour, of whom they scarce knew more than the
name, but whom the yearning ignorant heart of man never implores in
vain.

Cassy, who had glided out of her place of concealment, and, by
overhearing, learned the sacrifice that had been made for her and
Emmeline, had been there, the night before, defying the danger of
detection; and, moved by the last few words which the affectionate soul
had yet strength to breathe, the long winter of despair, the ice of
years, had given way, and the dark, despairing woman had wept and
prayed.

When George entered the shed, he felt his head giddy and his heart sick.

"Is it possible,--is it possible?" said he, kneeling down by him.
"Uncle Tom, my poor, poor old friend!"

Something in the voice penetrated to the ear of the dying. He moved his
head gently, smiled, and said,

     "Jesus can make a dying-bed
     Feel soft as down pillows are."

Tears which did honor to his manly heart fell from the young man's eyes,
as he bent over his poor friend.

"O, dear Uncle Tom! do wake,--do speak once more! Look up! Here's Mas'r
George,--your own little Mas'r George. Don't you know me?"

"Mas'r George!" said Tom, opening his eyes, and speaking in a feeble
voice; "Mas'r George!" He looked bewildered.

Slowly the idea seemed to fill his soul; and the vacant eye became fixed
and brightened, the whole face lighted up, the hard hands clasped, and
tears ran down the cheeks.

"Bless the Lord! it is,--it is,--it's all I wanted! They haven't forgot
me. It warms my soul; it does my heart good! Now I shall die content!
Bless the Lord, on my soul!"

"You shan't die! you _mustn't_ die, nor think of it! I've come to buy
you, and take you home," said George, with impetuous vehemence.

"O, Mas'r George, ye're too late. The Lord's bought me, and is going to
take me home,--and I long to go. Heaven is better than Kintuck."

"O, don't die! It'll kill me!--it'll break my heart to think what you've
suffered,--and lying in this old shed, here! Poor, poor fellow!"

"Don't call me poor fellow!" said Tom, solemnly, "I _have_ been poor
fellow; but that's all past and gone, now. I'm right in the door,
going into glory! O, Mas'r George! _Heaven has come!_ I've got the
victory!--the Lord Jesus has given it to me! Glory be to His name!"

George was awe-struck at the force, the vehemence, the power, with which
these broken sentences were uttered. He sat gazing in silence.

Tom grasped his hand, and continued,--"Ye mustn't, now, tell Chloe, poor
soul! how ye found me;--'t would be so drefful to her. Only tell her ye
found me going into glory; and that I couldn't stay for no one. And tell
her the Lord's stood by me everywhere and al'ays, and made everything
light and easy. And oh, the poor chil'en, and the baby;--my old
heart's been most broke for 'em, time and agin! Tell 'em all to
follow me--follow me! Give my love to Mas'r, and dear good Missis, and
everybody in the place! Ye don't know! 'Pears like I loves 'em all!
I loves every creature everywhar!--it's nothing _but_ love! O, Mas'r
George! what a thing 't is to be a Christian!"

At this moment, Legree sauntered up to the door of the shed, looked in,
with a dogged air of affected carelessness, and turned away.

"The old Satan!" said George, in his indignation. "It's a comfort to
think the devil will pay _him_ for this, some of these days!"

"O, don't!--oh, ye mustn't!" said Tom, grasping his hand; "he's a
poor mis'able critter! it's awful to think on 't! Oh, if he only could
repent, the Lord would forgive him now; but I'm 'feared he never will!"

"I hope he won't!" said George; "I never want to see _him_ in heaven!"

"Hush, Mas'r George!--it worries me! Don't feel so! He an't done me no
real harm,--only opened the gate of the kingdom for me; that's all!"

At this moment, the sudden flush of strength which the joy of meeting
his young master had infused into the dying man gave way. A sudden
sinking fell upon him; he closed his eyes; and that mysterious and
sublime change passed over his face, that told the approach of other
worlds.

He began to draw his breath with long, deep inspirations; and his broad
chest rose and fell, heavily. The expression of his face was that of a
conqueror.

"Who,--who,--who shall separate us from the love of Christ?" he said, in
a voice that contended with mortal weakness; and, with a smile, he fell
asleep.

George sat fixed with solemn awe. It seemed to him that the place was
holy; and, as he closed the lifeless eyes, and rose up from the dead,
only one thought possessed him,--that expressed by his simple old
friend,--"What a thing it is to be a Christian!"

He turned: Legree was standing, sullenly, behind him.

Something in that dying scene had checked the natural fierceness of
youthful passion. The presence of the man was simply loathsome to
George; and he felt only an impulse to get away from him, with as few
words as possible.

Fixing his keen dark eyes on Legree, he simply said, pointing to the
dead, "You have got all you ever can of him. What shall I pay you for
the body? I will take it away, and bury it decently."

"I don't sell dead niggers," said Legree, doggedly. "You are welcome to
bury him where and when you like."

"Boys," said George, in an authoritative tone, to two or three negroes,
who were looking at the body, "help me lift him up, and carry him to my
wagon; and get me a spade."

One of them ran for a spade; the other two assisted George to carry the
body to the wagon.

George neither spoke to nor looked at Legree, who did not countermand
his orders, but stood, whistling, with an air of forced unconcern. He
sulkily followed them to where the wagon stood at the door.

George spread his cloak in the wagon, and had the body carefully
disposed of in it,--moving the seat, so as to give it room. Then he
turned, fixed his eyes on Legree, and said, with forced composure,
