what it means, you know."

"On my word," said Marie, laughing, "that is the latest joke of the
season."

"Tom isn't a bad hand, now, at explaining Scripture, I'll dare swear,"
said St. Clare. "Tom has a natural genius for religion. I wanted the
horses out early, this morning, and I stole up to Tom's cubiculum there,
over the stables, and there I heard him holding a meeting by himself;
and, in fact, I haven't heard anything quite so savory as Tom's prayer,
this some time. He put in for me, with a zeal that was quite apostolic."

"Perhaps he guessed you were listening. I've heard of that trick
before."

"If he did, he wasn't very polite; for he gave the Lord his opinion
of me, pretty freely. Tom seemed to think there was decidedly room for
improvement in me, and seemed very earnest that I should be converted."

"I hope you'll lay it to heart," said Miss Ophelia.

"I suppose you are much of the same opinion," said St. Clare. "Well, we
shall see,--shan't we, Eva?"




The Freeman's Defence


There was a gentle bustle at the Quaker house, as the afternoon drew to
a close. Rachel Halliday moved quietly to and fro, collecting from her
household stores such needments as could be arranged in the smallest
compass, for the wanderers who were to go forth that night. The
afternoon shadows stretched eastward, and the round red sun stood
thoughtfully on the horizon, and his beams shone yellow and calm into
the little bed-room where George and his wife were sitting. He was
sitting with his child on his knee, and his wife's hand in his. Both
looked thoughtful and serious and traces of tears were on their cheeks.

"Yes, Eliza," said George, "I know all you say is true. You are a good
child,--a great deal better than I am; and I will try to do as you say.
I'll try to act worthy of a free man. I'll try to feel like a Christian.
God Almighty knows that I've meant to do well,--tried hard to do
well,--when everything has been against me; and now I'll forget all the
past, and put away every hard and bitter feeling, and read my Bible, and
learn to be a good man."

"And when we get to Canada," said Eliza, "I can help you. I can do
dress-making very well; and I understand fine washing and ironing; and
between us we can find something to live on."

"Yes, Eliza, so long as we have each other and our boy. O! Eliza, if
these people only knew what a blessing it is for a man to feel that
his wife and child belong to _him_! I've often wondered to see men that
could call their wives and children _their own_ fretting and worrying
about anything else. Why, I feel rich and strong, though we have nothing
but our bare hands. I feel as if I could scarcely ask God for any more.
Yes, though I've worked hard every day, till I am twenty-five years old,
and have not a cent of money, nor a roof to cover me, nor a spot of
land to call my own, yet, if they will only let me alone now, I will be
satisfied,--thankful; I will work, and send back the money for you and
my boy. As to my old master, he has been paid five times over for all he
ever spent for me. I don't owe him anything."

"But yet we are not quite out of danger," said Eliza; "we are not yet in
Canada."

"True," said George, "but it seems as if I smelt the free air, and it
makes me strong."

At this moment, voices were heard in the outer apartment, in earnest
conversation, and very soon a rap was heard on the door. Eliza started
and opened it.

Simeon Halliday was there, and with him a Quaker brother, whom he
introduced as Phineas Fletcher. Phineas was tall and lathy, red-haired,
with an expression of great acuteness and shrewdness in his face. He
had not the placid, quiet, unworldly air of Simeon Halliday; on the
contrary, a particularly wide-awake and _au fait_ appearance, like a
man who rather prides himself on knowing what he is about, and keeping
a bright lookout ahead; peculiarities which sorted rather oddly with his
broad brim and formal phraseology.

"Our friend Phineas hath discovered something of importance to the
interests of thee and thy party, George," said Simeon; "it were well for
thee to hear it."

"That I have," said Phineas, "and it shows the use of a man's always
sleeping with one ear open, in certain places, as I've always said.
Last night I stopped at a little lone tavern, back on the road. Thee
remembers the place, Simeon, where we sold some apples, last year, to
that fat woman, with the great ear-rings. Well, I was tired with hard
driving; and, after my supper I stretched myself down on a pile of bags
in the corner, and pulled a buffalo over me, to wait till my bed was
ready; and what does I do, but get fast asleep."

"With one ear open, Phineas?" said Simeon, quietly.

"No; I slept, ears and all, for an hour or two, for I was pretty well
tired; but when I came to myself a little, I found that there were some
men in the room, sitting round a table, drinking and talking; and I
thought, before I made much muster, I'd just see what they were up to,
especially as I heard them say something about the Quakers. 'So,' says
one, 'they are up in the Quaker settlement, no doubt,' says he. Then I
listened with both ears, and I found that they were talking about this
very party. So I lay and heard them lay off all their plans. This young
man, they said, was to be sent back to Kentucky, to his master, who was
going to make an example of him, to keep all niggers from running away;
and his wife two of them were going to run down to New Orleans to sell,
on their own account, and they calculated to get sixteen or eighteen
hundred dollars for her; and the child, they said, was going to a
trader, who had bought him; and then there was the boy, Jim, and his
mother, they were to go back to their masters in Kentucky. They said
that there were two constables, in a town a little piece ahead, who
would go in with 'em to get 'em taken up, and the young woman was to
be taken before a judge; and one of the fellows, who is small and
smooth-spoken, was to swear to her for his property, and get her
delivered over to him to take south. They've got a right notion of the
track we are going tonight; and they'll be down after us, six or eight
strong. So now, what's to be done?"

The group that stood in various attitudes, after this communication,
were worthy of a painter. Rachel Halliday, who had taken her hands out
of a batch of biscuit, to hear the news, stood with them upraised and
floury, and with a face of the deepest concern. Simeon looked profoundly
thoughtful; Eliza had thrown her arms around her husband, and was
looking up to him. George stood with clenched hands and glowing eyes,
and looking as any other man might look, whose wife was to be sold at
auction, and son sent to a trader, all under the shelter of a Christian
nation's laws.

"What _shall_ we do, George?" said Eliza faintly.

"I know what _I_ shall do," said George, as he stepped into the little
room, and began examining pistols.

"Ay, ay," said Phineas, nodding his head to Simeon; "thou seest, Simeon,
how it will work."

"I see," said Simeon, sighing; "I pray it come not to that."

"I don't want to involve any one with or for me," said George. "If you
will lend me your vehicle and direct me, I will drive alone to the next
stand. Jim is a giant in strength, and brave as death and despair, and
so am I."

"Ah, well, friend," said Phineas, "but thee'll need a driver, for all
that. Thee's quite welcome to do all the fighting, thee knows; but I
know a thing or two about the road, that thee doesn't."

"But I don't want to involve you," said George.

"Involve," said Phineas, with a curious and keen expression of face,
"When thee does involve me, please to let me know."

"Phineas is a wise and skilful man," said Simeon. "Thee does well,
George, to abide by his judgment; and," he added, laying his hand kindly
on George's shoulder, and pointing to the pistols, "be not over hasty
with these,--young blood is hot."

"I will attack no man," said George. "All I ask of this country is to be
let alone, and I will go out peaceably; but,"--he paused, and his brow
darkened and his face worked,--"I've had a sister sold in that New
Orleans market. I know what they are sold for; and am I going to stand
by and see them take my wife and sell her, when God has given me a pair
of strong arms to defend her? No; God help me! I'll fight to the last
breath, before they shall take my wife and son. Can you blame me?"

"Mortal man cannot blame thee, George. Flesh and blood could not do
otherwise," said Simeon. "Woe unto the world because of offences, but
woe unto them through whom the offence cometh."

"Would not even you, sir, do the same, in my place?"

"I pray that I be not tried," said Simeon; "the flesh is weak."

"I think my flesh would be pretty tolerable strong, in such a case,"
said Phineas, stretching out a pair of arms like the sails of a
windmill. "I an't sure, friend George, that I shouldn't hold a fellow
for thee, if thee had any accounts to settle with him."

"If man should _ever_ resist evil," said Simeon, "then George should
feel free to do it now: but the leaders of our people taught a more
excellent way; for the wrath of man worketh not the righteousness of
God; but it goes sorely against the corrupt will of man, and none can
receive it save they to whom it is given. Let us pray the Lord that we
be not tempted."

"And so _I_ do," said Phineas; "but if we are tempted too much--why, let
them look out, that's all."

"It's quite plain thee wasn't born a Friend," said Simeon, smiling. "The
old nature hath its way in thee pretty strong as yet."

To tell the truth, Phineas had been a hearty, two-fisted backwoodsman,
a vigorous hunter, and a dead shot at a buck; but, having wooed a pretty
Quakeress, had been moved by the power of her charms to join the society
in his neighborhood; and though he was an honest, sober, and efficient
member, and nothing particular could be alleged against him, yet the
more spiritual among them could not but discern an exceeding lack of
savor in his developments.

"Friend Phineas will ever have ways of his own," said Rachel Halliday,
smiling; "but we all think that his heart is in the right place, after
all."

"Well," said George, "isn't it best that we hasten our flight?"

"I got up at four o'clock, and came on with all speed, full two or three
hours ahead of them, if they start at the time they planned. It isn't
safe to start till dark, at any rate; for there are some evil persons
in the villages ahead, that might be disposed to meddle with us, if they
saw our wagon, and that would delay us more than the waiting; but in
two hours I think we may venture. I will go over to Michael Cross, and
engage him to come behind on his swift nag, and keep a bright lookout
on the road, and warn us if any company of men come on. Michael keeps a
horse that can soon get ahead of most other horses; and he could shoot
ahead and let us know, if there were any danger. I am going out now
to warn Jim and the old woman to be in readiness, and to see about the
horse. We have a pretty fair start, and stand a good chance to get to
the stand before they can come up with us. So, have good courage, friend
George; this isn't the first ugly scrape that I've been in with thy
people," said Phineas, as he closed the door.

"Phineas is pretty shrewd," said Simeon. "He will do the best that can
be done for thee, George."

"All I am sorry for," said George, "is the risk to you."

"Thee'll much oblige us, friend George, to say no more about that. What
we do we are conscience bound to do; we can do no other way. And now,
mother," said he, turning to Rachel, "hurry thy preparations for these
friends, for we must not send them away fasting."

And while Rachel and her children were busy making corn-cake, and
cooking ham and chicken, and hurrying on the _et ceteras_ of the evening
meal, George and his wife sat in their little room, with their arms
folded about each other, in such talk as husband and wife have when they
know that a few hours may part them forever.

"Eliza," said George, "people that have friends, and houses, and lands,
and money, and all those things _can't_ love as we do, who have nothing
but each other. Till I knew you, Eliza, no creature had loved me, but my
poor, heart-broken mother and sister. I saw poor Emily that morning the
trader carried her off. She came to the corner where I was lying asleep,
and said, 'Poor George, your last friend is going. What will become of
you, poor boy?' And I got up and threw my arms round her, and cried and
sobbed, and she cried too; and those were the last kind words I got for
ten long years; and my heart all withered up, and felt as dry as ashes,
till I met you. And your loving me,--why, it was almost like raising one
from the dead! I've been a new man ever since! And now, Eliza, I'll give
my last drop of blood, but they _shall not_ take you from me. Whoever
gets you must walk over my dead body."

"O, Lord, have mercy!" said Eliza, sobbing. "If he will only let us get
out of this country together, that is all we ask."

"Is God on their side?" said George, speaking less to his wife than
pouring out his own bitter thoughts. "Does he see all they do? Why does
he let such things happen? And they tell us that the Bible is on their
side; certainly all the power is. They are rich, and healthy, and happy;
they are members of churches, expecting to go to heaven; and they get
along so easy in the world, and have it all their own way; and poor,
honest, faithful Christians,--Christians as good or better than
they,--are lying in the very dust under their feet. They buy 'em
and sell 'em, and make trade of their heart's blood, and groans and
tears,--and God _lets_ them."

"Friend George," said Simeon, from the kitchen, "listen to this Psalm;
it may do thee good."

George drew his seat near the door, and Eliza, wiping her tears, came
forward also to listen, while Simeon read as follows:

"But as for me, my feet were almost gone; my steps had well-nigh
slipped. For I was envious of the foolish, when I saw the prosperity
of the wicked. They are not in trouble like other men, neither are they
plagued like other men. Therefore, pride compasseth them as a chain;
violence covereth them as a garment. Their eyes stand out with fatness;
they have more than heart could wish. They are corrupt, and speak
wickedly concerning oppression; they speak loftily. Therefore his people
return, and the waters of a full cup are wrung out to them, and they
say, How doth God know? and is there knowledge in the Most High?"

"Is not that the way thee feels, George?"

"It is so indeed," said George,--"as well as I could have written it
myself."

"Then, hear," said Simeon: "When I thought to know this, it was too
painful for me until I went unto the sanctuary of God. Then understood I
their end. Surely thou didst set them in slippery places, thou castedst
them down to destruction. As a dream when one awaketh, so, oh Lord,
when thou awakest, thou shalt despise their image. Nevertheless I am
continually with thee; thou hast holden me by my right hand. Thou shalt
guide me by thy counsel, and afterwards receive me to glory. It is good
for me to draw near unto God. I have put my trust in the Lord God."*

     * Ps. 73, "The End of the Wicked contrasted with that of the
     Righteous."

The words of holy trust, breathed by the friendly old man, stole like
sacred music over the harassed and chafed spirit of George; and after
he ceased, he sat with a gentle and subdued expression on his fine
features.

"If this world were all, George," said Simeon, "thee might, indeed, ask
where is the Lord? But it is often those who have least of all in this
life whom he chooseth for the kingdom. Put thy trust in him and, no
matter what befalls thee here, he will make all right hereafter."

If these words had been spoken by some easy, self-indulgent exhorter,
from whose mouth they might have come merely as pious and rhetorical
flourish, proper to be used to people in distress, perhaps they might
not have had much effect; but coming from one who daily and calmly
risked fine and imprisonment for the cause of God and man, they had a
weight that could not but be felt, and both the poor, desolate fugitives
found calmness and strength breathing into them from it.

And now Rachel took Eliza's hand kindly, and led the way to the
supper-table. As they were sitting down, a light tap sounded at the
door, and Ruth entered.

"I just ran in," she said, "with these little stockings for the
boy,--three pair, nice, warm woollen ones. It will be so cold, thee
knows, in Canada. Does thee keep up good courage, Eliza?" she added,
tripping round to Eliza's side of the table, and shaking her warmly
by the hand, and slipping a seed-cake into Harry's hand. "I brought a
little parcel of these for him," she said, tugging at her pocket to get
out the package. "Children, thee knows, will always be eating."

"O, thank you; you are too kind," said Eliza.

"Come, Ruth, sit down to supper," said Rachel.

"I couldn't, any way. I left John with the baby, and some biscuits in
the oven; and I can't stay a moment, else John will burn up all the
biscuits, and give the baby all the sugar in the bowl. That's the way
he does," said the little Quakeress, laughing. "So, good-by, Eliza;
good-by, George; the Lord grant thee a safe journey;" and, with a few
tripping steps, Ruth was out of the apartment.

A little while after supper, a large covered-wagon drew up before the
door; the night was clear starlight; and Phineas jumped briskly down
from his seat to arrange his passengers. George walked out of the door,
with his child on one arm and his wife on the other. His step was firm,
his face settled and resolute. Rachel and Simeon came out after them.

"You get out, a moment," said Phineas to those inside, "and let me fix
the back of the wagon, there, for the women-folks and the boy."

"Here are the two buffaloes," said Rachel. "Make the seats as
comfortable as may be; it's hard riding all night."

Jim came out first, and carefully assisted out his old mother, who clung
to his arm, and looked anxiously about, as if she expected the pursuer
every moment.

"Jim, are your pistols all in order?" said George, in a low, firm voice.

"Yes, indeed," said Jim.

"And you've no doubt what you shall do, if they come?"

"I rather think I haven't," said Jim, throwing open his broad chest, and
taking a deep breath. "Do you think I'll let them get mother again?"

During this brief colloquy, Eliza had been taking her leave of her
kind friend, Rachel, and was handed into the carriage by Simeon,
and, creeping into the back part with her boy, sat down among the
buffalo-skins. The old woman was next handed in and seated and George
and Jim placed on a rough board seat front of them, and Phineas mounted
in front.

"Farewell, my friends," said Simeon, from without.

"God bless you!" answered all from within.

And the wagon drove off, rattling and jolting over the frozen road.

There was no opportunity for conversation, on account of the roughness
of the way and the noise of the wheels. The vehicle, therefore,
rumbled on, through long, dark stretches of woodland,--over wide dreary
plains,--up hills, and down valleys,--and on, on, on they jogged, hour
after hour. The child soon fell asleep, and lay heavily in his mother's
lap. The poor, frightened old woman at last forgot her fears; and, even
Eliza, as the night waned, found all her anxieties insufficient to keep
her eyes from closing. Phineas seemed, on the whole, the briskest of
the company, and beguiled his long drive with whistling certain very
unquaker-like songs, as he went on.

But about three o'clock George's ear caught the hasty and decided click
of a horse's hoof coming behind them at some distance and jogged Phineas
by the elbow. Phineas pulled up his horses, and listened.

"That must be Michael," he said; "I think I know the sound of his
gallop;" and he rose up and stretched his head anxiously back over the
road.

A man riding in hot haste was now dimly descried at the top of a distant
hill.

"There he is, I do believe!" said Phineas. George and Jim both sprang
out of the wagon before they knew what they were doing. All stood
intensely silent, with their faces turned towards the expected
messenger. On he came. Now he went down into a valley, where they could
not see him; but they heard the sharp, hasty tramp, rising nearer and
nearer; at last they saw him emerge on the top of an eminence, within
hail.

"Yes, that's Michael!" said Phineas; and, raising his voice, "Halloa,
there, Michael!"

"Phineas! is that thee?"

"Yes; what news--they coming?"

"Right on behind, eight or ten of them, hot with brandy, swearing and
foaming like so many wolves."

And, just as he spoke, a breeze brought the faint sound of galloping
horsemen towards them.

"In with you,--quick, boys, _in!_" said Phineas. "If you must fight,
wait till I get you a piece ahead." And, with the word, both jumped
in, and Phineas lashed the horses to a run, the horseman keeping close
beside them. The wagon rattled, jumped, almost flew, over the frozen
ground; but plainer, and still plainer, came the noise of pursuing
horsemen behind. The women heard it, and, looking anxiously out, saw,
far in the rear, on the brow of a distant hill, a party of men looming
up against the red-streaked sky of early dawn. Another hill, and
their pursuers had evidently caught sight of their wagon, whose white
cloth-covered top made it conspicuous at some distance, and a loud yell
of brutal triumph came forward on the wind. Eliza sickened, and strained
her child closer to her bosom; the old woman prayed and groaned, and
George and Jim clenched their pistols with the grasp of despair. The
pursuers gained on them fast; the carriage made a sudden turn, and
brought them near a ledge of a steep overhanging rock, that rose in an
isolated ridge or clump in a large lot, which was, all around it, quite
clear and smooth. This isolated pile, or range of rocks, rose up black
and heavy against the brightening sky, and seemed to promise shelter and
concealment. It was a place well known to Phineas, who had been familiar
with the spot in his hunting days; and it was to gain this point he had
been racing his horses.

"Now for it!" said he, suddenly checking his horses, and springing from
his seat to the ground. "Out with you, in a twinkling, every one, and up
into these rocks with me. Michael, thee tie thy horse to the wagon, and
drive ahead to Amariah's and get him and his boys to come back and talk
to these fellows."

In a twinkling they were all out of the carriage.

"There," said Phineas, catching up Harry, "you, each of you, see to the
women; and run, _now_ if you ever _did_ run!"

They needed no exhortation. Quicker than we can say it, the whole party
were over the fence, making with all speed for the rocks, while Michael,
throwing himself from his horse, and fastening the bridle to the wagon,
began driving it rapidly away.

"Come ahead," said Phineas, as they reached the rocks, and saw in the
mingled starlight and dawn, the traces of a rude but plainly marked
foot-path leading up among them; "this is one of our old hunting-dens.
Come up!"

Phineas went before, springing up the rocks like a goat, with the boy
in his arms. Jim came second, bearing his trembling old mother over
his shoulder, and George and Eliza brought up the rear. The party of
horsemen came up to the fence, and, with mingled shouts and oaths,
were dismounting, to prepare to follow them. A few moments' scrambling
brought them to the top of the ledge; the path then passed between a
narrow defile, where only one could walk at a time, till suddenly they
came to a rift or chasm more than a yard in breadth, and beyond which
lay a pile of rocks, separate from the rest of the ledge, standing full
thirty feet high, with its sides steep and perpendicular as those of
a castle. Phineas easily leaped the chasm, and sat down the boy on a
smooth, flat platform of crisp white moss, that covered the top of the
rock.

"Over with you!" he called; "spring, now, once, for your lives!" said
he, as one after another sprang across. Several fragments of loose stone
formed a kind of breast-work, which sheltered their position from the
observation of those below.

"Well, here we all are," said Phineas, peeping over the stone
breast-work to watch the assailants, who were coming tumultuously up
under the rocks. "Let 'em get us, if they can. Whoever comes here has to
walk single file between those two rocks, in fair range of your pistols,
boys, d'ye see?"

"I do see," said George! "and now, as this matter is ours, let us take
all the risk, and do all the fighting."

"Thee's quite welcome to do the fighting, George," said Phineas, chewing
some checkerberry-leaves as he spoke; "but I may have the fun of looking
on, I suppose. But see, these fellows are kinder debating down there,
and looking up, like hens when they are going to fly up on to the roost.
Hadn't thee better give 'em a word of advice, before they come up, just
