contrary, she hugged her, and laughed, and cried, till her sanity was a
thing to be doubted of; and when released from her, Eva flew from one
to another, shaking hands and kissing, in a way that Miss Ophelia
afterwards declared fairly turned her stomach.

"Well!" said Miss Ophelia, "you southern children can do something that
_I_ couldn't."

"What, now, pray?" said St. Clare.

"Well, I want to be kind to everybody, and I wouldn't have anything
hurt; but as to kissing--"

"Niggers," said St. Clare, "that you're not up to,--hey?"

"Yes, that's it. How can she?"

St. Clare laughed, as he went into the passage. "Halloa, here, what's
to pay out here? Here, you all--Mammy, Jimmy, Polly, Sukey--glad to see
Mas'r?" he said, as he went shaking hands from one to another. "Look out
for the babies!" he added, as he stumbled over a sooty little urchin,
who was crawling upon all fours. "If I step upon anybody, let 'em
mention it."

There was an abundance of laughing and blessing Mas'r, as St. Clare
distributed small pieces of change among them.

"Come, now, take yourselves off, like good boys and girls," he said; and
the whole assemblage, dark and light, disappeared through a door into a
large verandah, followed by Eva, who carried a large satchel, which she
had been filling with apples, nuts, candy, ribbons, laces, and toys of
every description, during her whole homeward journey.

As St. Clare turned to go back his eye fell upon Tom, who was standing
uneasily, shifting from one foot to the other, while Adolph stood
negligently leaning against the banisters, examining Tom through an
opera-glass, with an air that would have done credit to any dandy
living.

"Puh! you puppy," said his master, striking down the opera glass; "is
that the way you treat your company? Seems to me, Dolph," he added,
laying his finger on the elegant figured satin vest that Adolph was
sporting, "seems to me that's _my_ vest."

"O! Master, this vest all stained with wine; of course, a gentleman in
Master's standing never wears a vest like this. I understood I was to
take it. It does for a poor nigger-fellow, like me."

And Adolph tossed his head, and passed his fingers through his scented
hair, with a grace.

"So, that's it, is it?" said St. Clare, carelessly. "Well, here, I'm
going to show this Tom to his mistress, and then you take him to the
kitchen; and mind you don't put on any of your airs to him. He's worth
two such puppies as you."

"Master always will have his joke," said Adolph, laughing. "I'm
delighted to see Master in such spirits."

"Here, Tom," said St. Clare, beckoning.

Tom entered the room. He looked wistfully on the velvet carpets, and the
before unimagined splendors of mirrors, pictures, statues, and curtains,
and, like the Queen of Sheba before Solomon, there was no more spirit in
him. He looked afraid even to set his feet down.

"See here, Marie," said St. Clare to his wife, "I've bought you a
coachman, at last, to order. I tell you, he's a regular hearse for
blackness and sobriety, and will drive you like a funeral, if you want.
Open your eyes, now, and look at him. Now, don't say I never think about
you when I'm gone."

Marie opened her eyes, and fixed them on Tom, without rising.

"I know he'll get drunk," she said.

"No, he's warranted a pious and sober article."

"Well, I hope he may turn out well," said the lady; "it's more than I
expect, though."

"Dolph," said St. Clare, "show Tom down stairs; and, mind yourself," he
added; "remember what I told you."

Adolph tripped gracefully forward, and Tom, with lumbering tread, went
after.

"He's a perfect behemoth!" said Marie.

"Come, now, Marie," said St. Clare, seating himself on a stool beside
her sofa, "be gracious, and say something pretty to a fellow."

"You've been gone a fortnight beyond the time," said the lady, pouting.

"Well, you know I wrote you the reason."

"Such a short, cold letter!" said the lady.

"Dear me! the mail was just going, and it had to be that or nothing."

"That's just the way, always," said the lady; "always something to make
your journeys long, and letters short."

"See here, now," he added, drawing an elegant velvet case out of his
pocket, and opening it, "here's a present I got for you in New York."

It was a daguerreotype, clear and soft as an engraving, representing Eva
and her father sitting hand in hand.

Marie looked at it with a dissatisfied air.

"What made you sit in such an awkward position?" she said.

"Well, the position may be a matter of opinion; but what do you think of
the likeness?"

"If you don't think anything of my opinion in one case, I suppose you
wouldn't in another," said the lady, shutting the daguerreotype.

"Hang the woman!" said St. Clare, mentally; but aloud he added, "Come,
now, Marie, what do you think of the likeness? Don't be nonsensical,
now."

"It's very inconsiderate of you, St. Clare," said the lady, "to insist
on my talking and looking at things. You know I've been lying all day
with the sick-headache; and there's been such a tumult made ever since
you came, I'm half dead."

"You're subject to the sick-headache, ma'am!" said Miss Ophelia,
suddenly rising from the depths of the large arm-chair, where she had
sat quietly, taking an inventory of the furniture, and calculating its
expense.

"Yes, I'm a perfect martyr to it," said the lady.

"Juniper-berry tea is good for sick-headache," said Miss Ophelia; "at
least, Auguste, Deacon Abraham Perry's wife, used to say so; and she was
a great nurse."

"I'll have the first juniper-berries that get ripe in our garden by
the lake brought in for that special purpose," said St. Clare, gravely
pulling the bell as he did so; "meanwhile, cousin, you must be wanting
to retire to your apartment, and refresh yourself a little, after your
journey. Dolph," he added, "tell Mammy to come here." The decent mulatto
woman whom Eva had caressed so rapturously soon entered; she was dressed
neatly, with a high red and yellow turban on her head, the recent gift
of Eva, and which the child had been arranging on her head. "Mammy,"
said St. Clare, "I put this lady under your care; she is tired,
and wants rest; take her to her chamber, and be sure she is made
comfortable," and Miss Ophelia disappeared in the rear of Mammy.




Tom's Mistress and Her Opinions

"And now, Marie," said St. Clare, "your golden days are dawning. Here is
our practical, business-like New England cousin, who will take the
whole budget of cares off your shoulders, and give you time to refresh
yourself, and grow young and handsome. The ceremony of delivering the
keys had better come off forthwith."

This remark was made at the breakfast-table, a few mornings after Miss
Ophelia had arrived.

"I'm sure she's welcome," said Marie, leaning her head languidly on her
hand. "I think she'll find one thing, if she does, and that is, that
it's we mistresses that are the slaves, down here."

"O, certainly, she will discover that, and a world of wholesome truths
besides, no doubt," said St. Clare.

"Talk about our keeping slaves, as if we did it for our _convenience_,"
said Marie. "I'm sure, if we consulted _that_, we might let them all go
at once."

Evangeline fixed her large, serious eyes on her mother's face, with an
earnest and perplexed expression, and said, simply, "What do you keep
them for, mamma?"

"I don't know, I'm sure, except for a plague; they are the plague of my
life. I believe that more of my ill health is caused by them than by any
one thing; and ours, I know, are the very worst that ever anybody was
plagued with."

"O, come, Marie, you've got the blues, this morning," said St. Clare.
"You know 't isn't so. There's Mammy, the best creature living,--what
could you do without her?"

"Mammy is the best I ever knew," said Marie; "and yet Mammy, now, is
selfish--dreadfully selfish; it's the fault of the whole race."

"Selfishness _is_ a dreadful fault," said St. Clare, gravely.

"Well, now, there's Mammy," said Marie, "I think it's selfish of her to
sleep so sound nights; she knows I need little attentions almost every
hour, when my worst turns are on, and yet she's so hard to wake. I
absolutely am worse, this very morning, for the efforts I had to make to
wake her last night."

"Hasn't she sat up with you a good many nights, lately, mamma?" said
Eva.

"How should you know that?" said Marie, sharply; "she's been
complaining, I suppose."

"She didn't complain; she only told me what bad nights you'd had,--so
many in succession."

"Why don't you let Jane or Rosa take her place, a night or two," said
St. Clare, "and let her rest?"

"How can you propose it?" said Marie. "St. Clare, you really are
inconsiderate. So nervous as I am, the least breath disturbs me; and a
strange hand about me would drive me absolutely frantic. If Mammy felt
the interest in me she ought to, she'd wake easier,--of course, she
would. I've heard of people who had such devoted servants, but it never
was _my_ luck;" and Marie sighed.

Miss Ophelia had listened to this conversation with an air of shrewd,
observant gravity; and she still kept her lips tightly compressed, as
if determined fully to ascertain her longitude and position, before she
committed herself.

"Now, Mammy has a _sort_ of goodness," said Marie; "she's smooth and
respectful, but she's selfish at heart. Now, she never will be done
fidgeting and worrying about that husband of hers. You see, when I was
married and came to live here, of course, I had to bring her with me,
and her husband my father couldn't spare. He was a blacksmith, and, of
course, very necessary; and I thought and said, at the time, that
Mammy and he had better give each other up, as it wasn't likely to
be convenient for them ever to live together again. I wish, now, I'd
insisted on it, and married Mammy to somebody else; but I was foolish
and indulgent, and didn't want to insist. I told Mammy, at the time,
that she mustn't ever expect to see him more than once or twice in her
life again, for the air of father's place doesn't agree with my health,
and I can't go there; and I advised her to take up with somebody else;
but no--she wouldn't. Mammy has a kind of obstinacy about her, in spots,
that everybody don't see as I do."

"Has she children?" said Miss Ophelia.

"Yes; she has two."

"I suppose she feels the separation from them?"

"Well, of course, I couldn't bring them. They were little dirty
things--I couldn't have them about; and, besides, they took up too
much of her time; but I believe that Mammy has always kept up a sort of
sulkiness about this. She won't marry anybody else; and I do believe,
now, though she knows how necessary she is to me, and how feeble my
health is, she would go back to her husband tomorrow, if she only could.
I _do_, indeed," said Marie; "they are just so selfish, now, the best of
them."

"It's distressing to reflect upon," said St. Clare, dryly.

Miss Ophelia looked keenly at him, and saw the flush of mortification
and repressed vexation, and the sarcastic curl of the lip, as he spoke.

"Now, Mammy has always been a pet with me," said Marie. "I wish some of
your northern servants could look at her closets of dresses,--silks and
muslins, and one real linen cambric, she has hanging there. I've worked
sometimes whole afternoons, trimming her caps, and getting her ready
to go to a party. As to abuse, she don't know what it is. She never was
whipped more than once or twice in her whole life. She has her strong
coffee or her tea every day, with white sugar in it. It's abominable, to
be sure; but St. Clare will have high life below-stairs, and they every
one of them live just as they please. The fact is, our servants are
over-indulged. I suppose it is partly our fault that they are selfish,
and act like spoiled children; but I've talked to St. Clare till I am
tired."

"And I, too," said St. Clare, taking up the morning paper.

Eva, the beautiful Eva, had stood listening to her mother, with that
expression of deep and mystic earnestness which was peculiar to her. She
walked softly round to her mother's chair, and put her arms round her
neck.

"Well, Eva, what now?" said Marie.

"Mamma, couldn't I take care of you one night--just one? I know I
shouldn't make you nervous, and I shouldn't sleep. I often lie awake
nights, thinking--"

"O, nonsense, child--nonsense!" said Marie; "you are such a strange
child!"

"But may I, mamma? I think," she said, timidly, "that Mammy isn't well.
She told me her head ached all the time, lately."

"O, that's just one of Mammy's fidgets! Mammy is just like all the rest
of them--makes such a fuss about every little headache or finger-ache;
it'll never do to encourage it--never! I'm principled about this
matter," said she, turning to Miss Ophelia; "you'll find the necessity
of it. If you encourage servants in giving way to every little
disagreeable feeling, and complaining of every little ailment, you'll
have your hands full. I never complain myself--nobody knows what I
endure. I feel it a duty to bear it quietly, and I do."

Miss Ophelia's round eyes expressed an undisguised amazement at this
peroration, which struck St. Clare as so supremely ludicrous, that he
burst into a loud laugh.

"St. Clare always laughs when I make the least allusion to my ill
health," said Marie, with the voice of a suffering martyr. "I only
hope the day won't come when he'll remember it!" and Marie put her
handkerchief to her eyes.

Of course, there was rather a foolish silence. Finally, St. Clare got
up, looked at his watch, and said he had an engagement down street. Eva
tripped away after him, and Miss Ophelia and Marie remained at the table
alone.

"Now, that's just like St. Clare!" said the latter, withdrawing her
handkerchief with somewhat of a spirited flourish when the criminal to
be affected by it was no longer in sight. "He never realizes, never
can, never will, what I suffer, and have, for years. If I was one of the
complaining sort, or ever made any fuss about my ailments, there would
be some reason for it. Men do get tired, naturally, of a complaining
wife. But I've kept things to myself, and borne, and borne, till St.
Clare has got in the way of thinking I can bear anything."

Miss Ophelia did not exactly know what she was expected to answer to
this.

While she was thinking what to say, Marie gradually wiped away her
tears, and smoothed her plumage in a general sort of way, as a dove
might be supposed to make toilet after a shower, and began a housewifely
chat with Miss Ophelia, concerning cupboards, closets, linen-presses,
store-rooms, and other matters, of which the latter was, by common
understanding, to assume the direction,--giving her so many cautious
directions and charges, that a head less systematic and business-like
than Miss Ophelia's would have been utterly dizzied and confounded.

"And now," said Marie, "I believe I've told you everything; so that,
when my next sick turn comes on, you'll be able to go forward entirely,
without consulting me;--only about Eva,--she requires watching."

"She seems to be a good child, very," said Miss Ophelia; "I never saw a
better child."

"Eva's peculiar," said her mother, "very. There are things about her so
singular; she isn't like me, now, a particle;" and Marie sighed, as if
this was a truly melancholy consideration.

Miss Ophelia in her own heart said, "I hope she isn't," but had prudence
enough to keep it down.

"Eva always was disposed to be with servants; and I think that well
enough with some children. Now, I always played with father's little
negroes--it never did me any harm. But Eva somehow always seems to put
herself on an equality with every creature that comes near her. It's a
strange thing about the child. I never have been able to break her of
it. St. Clare, I believe, encourages her in it. The fact is, St. Clare
indulges every creature under this roof but his own wife."

Again Miss Ophelia sat in blank silence.

"Now, there's no way with servants," said Marie, "but to _put them
down_, and keep them down. It was always natural to me, from a child.
Eva is enough to spoil a whole house-full. What she will do when she
comes to keep house herself, I'm sure I don't know. I hold to being
_kind_ to servants--I always am; but you must make 'em _know their
place_. Eva never does; there's no getting into the child's head the
first beginning of an idea what a servant's place is! You heard her
offering to take care of me nights, to let Mammy sleep! That's just a
specimen of the way the child would be doing all the time, if she was
left to herself."

"Why," said Miss Ophelia, bluntly, "I suppose you think your servants
are human creatures, and ought to have some rest when they are tired."

"Certainly, of course. I'm very particular in letting them have
everything that comes convenient,--anything that doesn't put one at
all out of the way, you know. Mammy can make up her sleep, some time
or other; there's no difficulty about that. She's the sleepiest concern
that ever I saw; sewing, standing, or sitting, that creature will go to
sleep, and sleep anywhere and everywhere. No danger but Mammy gets sleep
enough. But this treating servants as if they were exotic flowers, or
china vases, is really ridiculous," said Marie, as she plunged languidly
into the depths of a voluminous and pillowy lounge, and drew towards her
an elegant cut-glass vinaigrette.

"You see," she continued, in a faint and lady-like voice, like the last
dying breath of an Arabian jessamine, or something equally ethereal,
"you see, Cousin Ophelia, I don't often speak of myself. It isn't my
_habit_; 't isn't agreeable to me. In fact, I haven't strength to do
it. But there are points where St. Clare and I differ. St. Clare never
understood me, never appreciated me. I think it lies at the root of all
my ill health. St. Clare means well, I am bound to believe; but men are
constitutionally selfish and inconsiderate to woman. That, at least, is
my impression."

Miss Ophelia, who had not a small share of the genuine New England
caution, and a very particular horror of being drawn into family
difficulties, now began to foresee something of this kind impending; so,
composing her face into a grim neutrality, and drawing out of her pocket
about a yard and a quarter of stocking, which she kept as a specific
against what Dr. Watts asserts to be a personal habit of Satan when
people have idle hands, she proceeded to knit most energetically,
shutting her lips together in a way that said, as plain as words could,
"You needn't try to make me speak. I don't want anything to do with your
affairs,"--in fact, she looked about as sympathizing as a stone lion.
But Marie didn't care for that. She had got somebody to talk to, and she
felt it her duty to talk, and that was enough; and reinforcing herself
by smelling again at her vinaigrette, she went on.

"You see, I brought my own property and servants into the connection,
when I married St. Clare, and I am legally entitled to manage them my
own way. St. Clare had his fortune and his servants, and I'm well
enough content he should manage them his way; but St. Clare will be
interfering. He has wild, extravagant notions about things, particularly
about the treatment of servants. He really does act as if he set his
servants before me, and before himself, too; for he lets them make him
all sorts of trouble, and never lifts a finger. Now, about some things,
St. Clare is really frightful--he frightens me--good-natured as he
looks, in general. Now, he has set down his foot that, come what will,
there shall not be a blow struck in this house, except what he or I
strike; and he does it in a way that I really dare not cross him. Well,
you may see what that leads to; for St. Clare wouldn't raise his hand,
if every one of them walked over him, and I--you see how cruel it would
be to require me to make the exertion. Now, you know these servants are
nothing but grown-up children."

"I don't know anything about it, and I thank the Lord that I don't!"
said Miss Ophelia, shortly.

"Well, but you will have to know something, and know it to your cost,
if you stay here. You don't know what a provoking, stupid, careless,
unreasonable, childish, ungrateful set of wretches they are."

Marie seemed wonderfully supported, always, when she got upon this
topic; and she now opened her eyes, and seemed quite to forget her
languor.

"You don't know, and you can't, the daily, hourly trials that beset
a housekeeper from them, everywhere and every way. But it's no use to
complain to St. Clare. He talks the strangest stuff. He says we have
made them what they are, and ought to bear with them. He says their
faults are all owing to us, and that it would be cruel to make the fault
and punish it too. He says we shouldn't do any better, in their place;
just as if one could reason from them to us, you know."

"Don't you believe that the Lord made them of one blood with us?" said
Miss Ophelia, shortly.

"No, indeed not I! A pretty story, truly! They are a degraded race."

"Don't you think they've got immortal souls?" said Miss Ophelia, with
increasing indignation.

"O, well," said Marie, yawning, "that, of course--nobody doubts that.
But as to putting them on any sort of equality with us, you know, as if
we could be compared, why, it's impossible! Now, St. Clare really has
talked to me as if keeping Mammy from her husband was like keeping me
from mine. There's no comparing in this way. Mammy couldn't have the
feelings that I should. It's a different thing altogether,--of course,
it is,--and yet St. Clare pretends not to see it. And just as if Mammy
could love her little dirty babies as I love Eva! Yet St. Clare once
really and soberly tried to persuade me that it was my duty, with my
weak health, and all I suffer, to let Mammy go back, and take somebody
else in her place. That was a little too much even for _me_ to bear. I
don't often show my feelings, I make it a principle to endure everything
in silence; it's a wife's hard lot, and I bear it. But I did break out,
that time; so that he has never alluded to the subject since. But I know
by his looks, and little things that he says, that he thinks so as much
as ever; and it's so trying, so provoking!"

Miss Ophelia looked very much as if she was afraid she should say
something; but she rattled away with her needles in a way that had

"So, you just see," she continued, "what you've got to manage. A
household without any rule; where servants have it all their own way, do
what they please, and have what they please, except so far as I, with
my feeble health, have kept up government. I keep my cowhide about, and
sometimes I do lay it on; but the exertion is always too much for me. If
St. Clare would only have this thing done as others do--"

"And how's that?"

"Why, send them to the calaboose, or some of the other places to be
flogged. That's the only way. If I wasn't such a poor, feeble piece, I
believe I should manage with twice the energy that St. Clare does."

"And how does St. Clare contrive to manage?" said Miss Ophelia. "You say
he never strikes a blow."

"Well, men have a more commanding way, you know; it is easier for
them; besides, if you ever looked full in his eye, it's peculiar,--that
eye,--and if he speaks decidedly, there's a kind of flash. I'm afraid of
it, myself; and the servants know they must mind. I couldn't do as much
by a regular storm and scolding as St. Clare can by one turn of his eye,
if once he is in earnest. O, there's no trouble about St. Clare; that's
the reason he's no more feeling for me. But you'll find, when you come
to manage, that there's no getting along without severity,--they are so
bad, so deceitful, so lazy."

"The old tune," said St. Clare, sauntering in. "What an awful account
