The woman suddenly turned to her work, and labored with a despatch that
was perfectly astonishing to Tom. She seemed to work by magic. Before
the day was through, her basket was filled, crowded down, and piled, and
she had several times put largely into Tom's. Long after dusk, the
whole weary train, with their baskets on their heads, defiled up to the
building appropriated to the storing and weighing the cotton. Legree was
there, busily conversing with the two drivers.

"Dat ar Tom's gwine to make a powerful deal o' trouble; kept a puttin'
into Lucy's basket.--One o' these yer dat will get all der niggers to
feelin' 'bused, if Masir don't watch him!" said Sambo.

"Hey-dey! The black cuss!" said Legree. "He'll have to get a breakin'
in, won't he, boys?"

Both negroes grinned a horrid grin, at this intimation.

"Ay, ay! Let Mas'r Legree alone, for breakin' in! De debil heself
couldn't beat Mas'r at dat!" said Quimbo.

"Wal, boys, the best way is to give him the flogging to do, till he gets
over his notions. Break him in!"

"Lord, Mas'r'll have hard work to get dat out o' him!"

"It'll have to come out of him, though!" said Legree, as he rolled his
tobacco in his mouth.

"Now, dar's Lucy,--de aggravatinest, ugliest wench on de place!" pursued
Sambo.

"Take care, Sam; I shall begin to think what's the reason for your spite
agin Lucy."

"Well, Mas'r knows she sot herself up agin Mas'r, and wouldn't have me,
when he telled her to."

"I'd a flogged her into 't," said Legree, spitting, "only there's such a
press o' work, it don't seem wuth a while to upset her jist now. She's
slender; but these yer slender gals will bear half killin' to get their
own way!"

"Wal, Lucy was real aggravatin' and lazy, sulkin' round; wouldn't do
nothin,--and Tom he stuck up for her."

"He did, eh! Wal, then, Tom shall have the pleasure of flogging her.
It'll be a good practice for him, and he won't put it on to the gal like
you devils, neither."

"Ho, ho! haw! haw! haw!" laughed both the sooty wretches; and the
diabolical sounds seemed, in truth, a not unapt expression of the
fiendish character which Legree gave them.

"Wal, but, Mas'r, Tom and Misse Cassy, and dey among 'em, filled Lucy's
basket. I ruther guess der weight 's in it, Mas'r!"

"_I do the weighing!_" said Legree, emphatically.

Both the drivers again laughed their diabolical laugh.

"So!" he added, "Misse Cassy did her day's work."

"She picks like de debil and all his angels!"

"She's got 'em all in her, I believe!" said Legree; and, growling a
brutal oath, he proceeded to the weighing-room.


Slowly the weary, dispirited creatures, wound their way into the room,
and, with crouching reluctance, presented their baskets to be weighed.

Legree noted on a slate, on the side of which was pasted a list of
names, the amount.

Tom's basket was weighed and approved; and he looked, with an anxious
glance, for the success of the woman he had befriended.

Tottering with weakness, she came forward, and delivered her basket. It
was of full weight, as Legree well perceived; but, affecting anger, he
said,

"What, you lazy beast! short again! stand aside, you'll catch it, pretty
soon!"

The woman gave a groan of utter despair, and sat down on a board.

The person who had been called Misse Cassy now came forward, and, with
a haughty, negligent air, delivered her basket. As she delivered it,
Legree looked in her eyes with a sneering yet inquiring glance.

She fixed her black eyes steadily on him, her lips moved slightly, and
she said something in French. What it was, no one knew; but Legree's
face became perfectly demoniacal in its expression, as she spoke; he
half raised his hand, as if to strike,--a gesture which she regarded
with fierce disdain, as she turned and walked away.

"And now," said Legree, "come here, you Tom. You see, I telled ye I
didn't buy ye jest for the common work; I mean to promote ye, and make a
driver of ye; and tonight ye may jest as well begin to get yer hand in.
Now, ye jest take this yer gal and flog her; ye've seen enough on't to
know how."

"I beg Mas'r's pardon," said Tom; "hopes Mas'r won't set me at that. It's
what I an't used to,--never did,--and can't do, no way possible."

"Ye'll larn a pretty smart chance of things ye never did know, before
I've done with ye!" said Legree, taking up a cowhide, and striking Tom a
heavy blow cross the cheek, and following up the infliction by a shower
of blows.

"There!" he said, as he stopped to rest; "now, will ye tell me ye can't
do it?"

"Yes, Mas'r," said Tom, putting up his hand, to wipe the blood, that
trickled down his face. "I'm willin' to work, night and day, and work
while there's life and breath in me; but this yer thing I can't feel it
right to do;--and, Mas'r, I _never_ shall do it,--_never_!"

Tom had a remarkably smooth, soft voice, and a habitually respectful
manner, that had given Legree an idea that he would be cowardly, and
easily subdued. When he spoke these last words, a thrill of amazement
went through every one; the poor woman clasped her hands, and said,
"O Lord!" and every one involuntarily looked at each other and drew in
their breath, as if to prepare for the storm that was about to burst.

Legree looked stupefied and confounded; but at last burst forth,--"What!
ye blasted black beast! tell _me_ ye don't think it _right_ to do what
I tell ye! What have any of you cussed cattle to do with thinking what's
right? I'll put a stop to it! Why, what do ye think ye are? May be ye
think ye'r a gentleman master, Tom, to be a telling your master what's
right, and what ain't! So you pretend it's wrong to flog the gal!"

"I think so, Mas'r," said Tom; "the poor crittur's sick and feeble; 't
would be downright cruel, and it's what I never will do, nor begin to.
Mas'r, if you mean to kill me, kill me; but, as to my raising my hand
agin any one here, I never shall,--I'll die first!"

Tom spoke in a mild voice, but with a decision that could not be
mistaken. Legree shook with anger; his greenish eyes glared fiercely,
and his very whiskers seemed to curl with passion; but, like some
ferocious beast, that plays with its victim before he devours it, he
kept back his strong impulse to proceed to immediate violence, and broke
out into bitter raillery.

"Well, here's a pious dog, at last, let down among us sinners!--a saint,
a gentleman, and no less, to talk to us sinners about our sins! Powerful
holy critter, he must be! Here, you rascal, you make believe to be so
pious,--didn't you never hear, out of yer Bible, 'Servants, obey yer
masters'? An't I yer master? Didn't I pay down twelve hundred dollars,
cash, for all there is inside yer old cussed black shell? An't yer mine,
now, body and soul?" he said, giving Tom a violent kick with his heavy
boot; "tell me!"

In the very depth of physical suffering, bowed by brutal oppression,
this question shot a gleam of joy and triumph through Tom's soul. He
suddenly stretched himself up, and, looking earnestly to heaven, while
the tears and blood that flowed down his face mingled, he exclaimed,

"No! no! no! my soul an't yours, Mas'r! You haven't bought it,--ye
can't buy it! It's been bought and paid for, by one that is able to keep
it;--no matter, no matter, you can't harm me!"

"I can't!" said Legree, with a sneer; "we'll see,--we'll see! Here,
Sambo, Quimbo, give this dog such a breakin' in as he won't get over,
this month!"

The two gigantic negroes that now laid hold of Tom, with fiendish
exultation in their faces, might have formed no unapt personification of
powers of darkness. The poor woman screamed with apprehension, and all
rose, as by a general impulse, while they dragged him unresisting from
the place.




The Quadroon's Story


And behold the tears of such as are oppressed; and on the side of
their oppressors there was power. Wherefore I praised the dead that are
already dead more than the living that are yet alive.--ECCL. 4:1.

It was late at night, and Tom lay groaning and bleeding alone, in an old
forsaken room of the gin-house, among pieces of broken machinery, piles
of damaged cotton, and other rubbish which had there accumulated.

The night was damp and close, and the thick air swarmed with myriads of
mosquitos, which increased the restless torture of his wounds; whilst
a burning thirst--a torture beyond all others--filled up the uttermost
measure of physical anguish.

"O, good Lord! _Do_ look down,--give me the victory!--give me the
victory over all!" prayed poor Tom, in his anguish.

A footstep entered the room, behind him, and the light of a lantern
flashed on his eyes.

"Who's there? O, for the Lord's massy, please give me some water!"

The woman Cassy--for it was she,--set down her lantern, and, pouring
water from a bottle, raised his head, and gave him drink. Another and
another cup were drained, with feverish eagerness.

"Drink all ye want," she said; "I knew how it would be. It isn't the
first time I've been out in the night, carrying water to such as you."

"Thank you, Missis," said Tom, when he had done drinking.

"Don't call me Missis! I'm a miserable slave, like yourself,--a lower
one than you can ever be!" said she, bitterly; "but now," said she,
going to the door, and dragging in a small pallaise, over which she had
spread linen cloths wet with cold water, "try, my poor fellow, to roll
yourself on to this."

Stiff with wounds and bruises, Tom was a long time in accomplishing this
movement; but, when done, he felt a sensible relief from the cooling
application to his wounds.

The woman, whom long practice with the victims of brutality had made
familiar with many healing arts, went on to make many applications to
Tom's wounds, by means of which he was soon somewhat relieved.

"Now," said the woman, when she had raised his head on a roll of damaged
cotton, which served for a pillow, "there's the best I can do for you."

Tom thanked her; and the woman, sitting down on the floor, drew up her
knees, and embracing them with her arms, looked fixedly before her, with
a bitter and painful expression of countenance. Her bonnet fell back,
and long wavy streams of black hair fell around her singular and
melancholy-face.

"It's no use, my poor fellow!" she broke out, at last, "it's of no use,
this you've been trying to do. You were a brave fellow,--you had the
right on your side; but it's all in vain, and out of the question, for
you to struggle. You are in the devil's hands;--he is the strongest, and
you must give up!"

Give up! and, had not human weakness and physical agony whispered
that, before? Tom started; for the bitter woman, with her wild eyes and
melancholy voice, seemed to him an embodiment of the temptation with
which he had been wrestling.

"O Lord! O Lord!" he groaned, "how can I give up?"

"There's no use calling on the Lord,--he never hears," said the woman,
steadily; "there isn't any God, I believe; or, if there is, he's taken
sides against us. All goes against us, heaven and earth. Everything is
pushing us into hell. Why shouldn't we go?"

Tom closed his eyes, and shuddered at the dark, atheistic words.

"You see," said the woman, "_you_ don't know anything about it--I do.
I've been on this place five years, body and soul, under this man's
foot; and I hate him as I do the devil! Here you are, on a lone
plantation, ten miles from any other, in the swamps; not a white person
here, who could testify, if you were burned alive,--if you were scalded,
cut into inch-pieces, set up for the dogs to tear, or hung up and
whipped to death. There's no law here, of God or man, that can do you,
or any one of us, the least good; and, this man! there's no earthly
thing that he's too good to do. I could make any one's hair rise, and
their teeth chatter, if I should only tell what I've seen and been
knowing to, here,--and it's no use resisting! Did I _want_ to live with
him? Wasn't I a woman delicately bred; and he,--God in heaven! what
was he, and is he? And yet, I've lived with him, these five years, and
cursed every moment of my life,--night and day! And now, he's got a
new one,--a young thing, only fifteen, and she brought up, she says,
piously. Her good mistress taught her to read the Bible; and she's
brought her Bible here--to hell with her!"--and the woman laughed a
wild and doleful laugh, that rung, with a strange, supernatural sound,
through the old ruined shed.

Tom folded his hands; all was darkness and horror.

"O Jesus! Lord Jesus! have you quite forgot us poor critturs?" burst
forth, at last;--"help, Lord, I perish!"

The woman sternly continued:

"And what are these miserable low dogs you work with, that you should
suffer on their account? Every one of them would turn against you, the
first time they got a chance. They are all of 'em as low and cruel to
each other as they can be; there's no use in your suffering to keep from
hurting them."

"Poor critturs!" said Tom,--"what made 'em cruel?--and, if I give out,
I shall get used to 't, and grow, little by little, just like 'em! No,
no, Missis! I've lost everything,--wife, and children, and home, and a
kind Mas'r,--and he would have set me free, if he'd only lived a week
longer; I've lost everything in _this_ world, and it's clean gone,
forever,--and now I _can't_ lose Heaven, too; no, I can't get to be
wicked, besides all!"

"But it can't be that the Lord will lay sin to our account," said the
woman; "he won't charge it to us, when we're forced to it; he'll charge
it to them that drove us to it."

"Yes," said Tom; "but that won't keep us from growing wicked. If I get
to be as hard-hearted as that ar' Sambo, and as wicked, it won't make
much odds to me how I come so; it's the bein' so,--that ar's what I'm a
dreadin'."

The woman fixed a wild and startled look on Tom, as if a new thought had
struck her; and then, heavily groaning, said,

"O God a' mercy! you speak the truth! O--O--O!"--and, with groans, she
fell on the floor, like one crushed and writhing under the extremity of
mental anguish.

There was a silence, a while, in which the breathing of both parties
could be heard, when Tom faintly said, "O, please, Missis!"

The woman suddenly rose up, with her face composed to its usual stern,
melancholy expression.

"Please, Missis, I saw 'em throw my coat in that ar' corner, and in my
coat-pocket is my Bible;--if Missis would please get it for me."

Cassy went and got it. Tom opened, at once, to a heavily marked passage,
much worn, of the last scenes in the life of Him by whose stripes we are
healed.

"If Missis would only be so good as read that ar',--it's better than
water."

Cassy took the book, with a dry, proud air, and looked over the passage.
She then read aloud, in a soft voice, and with a beauty of intonation
that was peculiar, that touching account of anguish and of glory. Often,
as she read, her voice faltered, and sometimes failed her altogether,
when she would stop, with an air of frigid composure, till she had
mastered herself. When she came to the touching words, "Father forgive
them, for they know not what they do," she threw down the book, and,
burying her face in the heavy masses of her hair, she sobbed aloud, with
a convulsive violence.

Tom was weeping, also, and occasionally uttering a smothered
ejaculation.

"If we only could keep up to that ar'!" said Tom;--"it seemed to come so
natural to him, and we have to fight so hard for 't! O Lord, help us! O
blessed Lord Jesus, do help us!"

"Missis," said Tom, after a while, "I can see that, some how, you're
quite 'bove me in everything; but there's one thing Missis might learn
even from poor Tom. Ye said the Lord took sides against us, because he
lets us be 'bused and knocked round; but ye see what come on his own
Son,--the blessed Lord of Glory,--wan't he allays poor? and have we,
any on us, yet come so low as he come? The Lord han't forgot us,--I'm
sartin' o' that ar'. If we suffer with him, we shall also reign,
Scripture says; but, if we deny Him, he also will deny us. Didn't they
all suffer?--the Lord and all his? It tells how they was stoned and
sawn asunder, and wandered about in sheep-skins and goat-skins, and was
destitute, afflicted, tormented. Sufferin' an't no reason to make us
think the Lord's turned agin us; but jest the contrary, if only we hold
on to him, and doesn't give up to sin."

"But why does he put us where we can't help but sin?" said the woman.

"I think we _can_ help it," said Tom.

"You'll see," said Cassy; "what'll you do? Tomorrow they'll be at you
again. I know 'em; I've seen all their doings; I can't bear to think of
all they'll bring you to;--and they'll make you give out, at last!"

"Lord Jesus!" said Tom, "you _will_ take care of my soul? O Lord,
do!--don't let me give out!"

"O dear!" said Cassy; "I've heard all this crying and praying before;
and yet, they've been broken down, and brought under. There's Emmeline,
she's trying to hold on, and you're trying,--but what use? You must give
up, or be killed by inches."

"Well, then, I _will_ die!" said Tom. "Spin it out as long as they can,
they can't help my dying, some time!--and, after that, they can't do
no more. I'm clar, I'm set! I _know_ the Lord'll help me, and bring me
through."

The woman did not answer; she sat with her black eyes intently fixed on
the floor.

"May be it's the way," she murmured to herself; "but those that _have_
given up, there's no hope for them!--none! We live in filth, and grow
loathsome, till we loathe ourselves! And we long to die, and we
don't dare to kill ourselves!--No hope! no hope! no hope?--this girl
now,--just as old as I was!

"You see me now," she said, speaking to Tom very rapidly; "see what I
am! Well, I was brought up in luxury; the first I remember is, playing
about, when I was a child, in splendid parlors,--when I was kept dressed
up like a doll, and company and visitors used to praise me. There was
a garden opening from the saloon windows; and there I used to play
hide-and-go-seek, under the orange-trees, with my brothers and sisters.
I went to a convent, and there I learned music, French and embroidery,
and what not; and when I was fourteen, I came out to my father's
funeral. He died very suddenly, and when the property came to be
settled, they found that there was scarcely enough to cover the debts;
and when the creditors took an inventory of the property, I was set down
in it. My mother was a slave woman, and my father had always meant to
set me free; but he had not done it, and so I was set down in the list.
I'd always known who I was, but never thought much about it. Nobody ever
expects that a strong, healthy man is going to die. My father was a well
man only four hours before he died;--it was one of the first cholera
cases in New Orleans. The day after the funeral, my father's wife took
her children, and went up to her father's plantation. I thought they
treated me strangely, but didn't know. There was a young lawyer who they
left to settle the business; and he came every day, and was about the
house, and spoke very politely to me. He brought with him, one day, a
young man, whom I thought the handsomest I had ever seen. I shall never
forget that evening. I walked with him in the garden. I was lonesome and
full of sorrow, and he was so kind and gentle to me; and he told me that
he had seen me before I went to the convent, and that he had loved me
a great while, and that he would be my friend and protector;--in short,
though he didn't tell me, he had paid two thousand dollars for me, and I
was his property,--I became his willingly, for I loved him. Loved!"
said the woman, stopping. "O, how I _did_ love that man! How I love him
now,--and always shall, while I breathe! He was so beautiful, so high,
so noble! He put me into a beautiful house, with servants, horses, and
carriages, and furniture, and dresses. Everything that money could buy,
he gave me; but I didn't set any value on all that,--I only cared for
him. I loved him better than my God and my own soul, and, if I tried, I
couldn't do any other way from what he wanted me to.

"I wanted only one thing--I did want him to _marry_ me. I thought, if he
loved me as he said he did, and if I was what he seemed to think I was,
he would be willing to marry me and set me free. But he convinced
me that it would be impossible; and he told me that, if we were only
faithful to each other, it was marriage before God. If that is true,
wasn't I that man's wife? Wasn't I faithful? For seven years, didn't I
study every look and motion, and only live and breathe to please him? He
had the yellow fever, and for twenty days and nights I watched with him.
I alone,--and gave him all his medicine, and did everything for him; and
then he called me his good angel, and said I'd saved his life. We had
two beautiful children. The first was a boy, and we called him Henry.
He was the image of his father,--he had such beautiful eyes, such a
forehead, and his hair hung all in curls around it; and he had all his
father's spirit, and his talent, too. Little Elise, he said, looked like
me. He used to tell me that I was the most beautiful woman in Louisiana,
he was so proud of me and the children. He used to love to have me dress
them up, and take them and me about in an open carriage, and hear
the remarks that people would make on us; and he used to fill my ears
constantly with the fine things that were said in praise of me and the
children. O, those were happy days! I thought I was as happy as any one
could be; but then there came evil times. He had a cousin come to New
Orleans, who was his particular friend,--he thought all the world of
him;--but, from the first time I saw him, I couldn't tell why, I dreaded
him; for I felt sure he was going to bring misery on us. He got Henry to
going out with him, and often he would not come home nights till two
or three o'clock. I did not dare say a word; for Henry was so high
spirited, I was afraid to. He got him to the gaming-houses; and he
was one of the sort that, when he once got a going there, there was no
holding back. And then he introduced him to another lady, and I saw soon
that his heart was gone from me. He never told me, but I saw it,--I
knew it, day after day,--I felt my heart breaking, but I could not say
a word! At this, the wretch offered to buy me and the children of Henry,
to clear off his gambling debts, which stood in the way of his marrying
as he wished;--and _he sold us_. He told me, one day, that he had
business in the country, and should be gone two or three weeks. He spoke
kinder than usual, and said he should come back; but it didn't deceive
me. I knew that the time had come; I was just like one turned into
stone; I couldn't speak, nor shed a tear. He kissed me and kissed the
children, a good many times, and went out. I saw him get on his horse,
and I watched him till he was quite out of sight; and then I fell down,
and fainted.

"Then _he_ came, the cursed wretch! he came to take possession. He told
me that he had bought me and my children; and showed me the papers. I
cursed him before God, and told him I'd die sooner than live with him."

"'Just as you please,' said he; 'but, if you don't behave reasonably,
I'll sell both the children, where you shall never see them again.' He
told me that he always had meant to have me, from the first time he saw
me; and that he had drawn Henry on, and got him in debt, on purpose to
make him willing to sell me. That he got him in love with another woman;
and that I might know, after all that, that he should not give up for a
few airs and tears, and things of that sort.

"I gave up, for my hands were tied. He had my children;--whenever I
resisted his will anywhere, he would talk about selling them, and he
made me as submissive as he desired. O, what a life it was! to live with
my heart breaking, every day,--to keep on, on, on, loving, when it was
only misery; and to be bound, body and soul, to one I hated. I used to
love to read to Henry, to play to him, to waltz with him, and sing to
him; but everything I did for this one was a perfect drag,--yet I was
afraid to refuse anything. He was very imperious, and harsh to the
children. Elise was a timid little thing; but Henry was bold and
high-spirited, like his father, and he had never been brought under, in
the least, by any one. He was always finding fault, and quarrelling with
him; and I used to live in daily fear and dread. I tried to make the
child respectful;--I tried to keep them apart, for I held on to those
children like death; but it did no good. _He sold both those children_.
He took me to ride, one day, and when I came home, they were nowhere to
be found! He told me he had sold them; he showed me the money, the price
of their blood. Then it seemed as if all good forsook me. I raved and
cursed,--cursed God and man; and, for a while, I believe, he really was
afraid of me. But he didn't give up so. He told me that my children were
sold, but whether I ever saw their faces again, depended on him; and
that, if I wasn't quiet, they should smart for it. Well, you can do
anything with a woman, when you've got her children. He made me submit;
he made me be peaceable; he flattered me with hopes that, perhaps, he
would buy them back; and so things went on, a week or two. One day, I
was out walking, and passed by the calaboose; I saw a crowd about the
