"I mean to shame her; that's just what I want. She has all her life
presumed on her delicacy, and her good looks, and her lady-like airs,
till she forgets who she is;--and I'll give her one lesson that will
bring her down, I fancy!"

"But, Cousin, consider that, if you destroy delicacy and a sense of
shame in a young girl, you deprave her very fast."

"Delicacy!" said Marie, with a scornful laugh,--"a fine word for such
as she! I'll teach her, with all her airs, that she's no better than the
raggedest black wench that walks the streets! She'll take no more airs
with me!"

"You will answer to God for such cruelty!" said Miss Ophelia, with
energy.

"Cruelty,--I'd like to know what the cruelty is! I wrote orders for only
fifteen lashes, and told him to put them on lightly. I'm sure there's no
cruelty there!"

"No cruelty!" said Miss Ophelia. "I'm sure any girl might rather be
killed outright!"

"It might seem so to anybody with your feeling; but all these creatures
get used to it; it's the only way they can be kept in order. Once let
them feel that they are to take any airs about delicacy, and all that,
and they'll run all over you, just as my servants always have. I've
begun now to bring them under; and I'll have them all to know that
I'll send one out to be whipped, as soon as another, if they don't mind
themselves!" said Marie, looking around her decidedly.

Jane hung her head and cowered at this, for she felt as if it was
particularly directed to her. Miss Ophelia sat for a moment, as if she
had swallowed some explosive mixture, and were ready to burst. Then,
recollecting the utter uselessness of contention with such a nature,
she shut her lips resolutely, gathered herself up, and walked out of the
room.

It was hard to go back and tell Rosa that she could do nothing for
her; and, shortly after, one of the man-servants came to say that her
mistress had ordered him to take Rosa with him to the whipping-house,
whither she was hurried, in spite of her tears and entreaties.

A few days after, Tom was standing musing by the balconies, when he was
joined by Adolph, who, since the death of his master, had been entirely
crest-fallen and disconsolate. Adolph knew that he had always been an
object of dislike to Marie; but while his master lived he had paid but
little attention to it. Now that he was gone, he had moved about in
daily dread and trembling, not knowing what might befall him next. Marie
had held several consultations with her lawyer; after communicating with
St. Clare's brother, it was determined to sell the place, and all the
servants, except her own personal property, and these she intended to
take with her, and go back to her father's plantation.

"Do ye know, Tom, that we've all got to be sold?" said Adolph.

"How did you hear that?" said Tom.

"I hid myself behind the curtains when Missis was talking with the
lawyer. In a few days we shall be sent off to auction, Tom."

"The Lord's will be done!" said Tom, folding his arms and sighing
heavily.

"We'll never get another such a master," said Adolph, apprehensively;
"but I'd rather be sold than take my chance under Missis."

Tom turned away; his heart was full. The hope of liberty, the thought
of distant wife and children, rose up before his patient soul, as to the
mariner shipwrecked almost in port rises the vision of the church-spire
and loving roofs of his native village, seen over the top of some black
wave only for one last farewell. He drew his arms tightly over his
bosom, and choked back the bitter tears, and tried to pray. The poor old
soul had such a singular, unaccountable prejudice in favor of liberty,
that it was a hard wrench for him; and the more he said, "Thy will be
done," the worse he felt.

He sought Miss Ophelia, who, ever since Eva's death, had treated him
with marked and respectful kindness.

"Miss Feely," he said, "Mas'r St. Clare promised me my freedom. He told
me that he had begun to take it out for me; and now, perhaps, if Miss
Feely would be good enough to speak bout it to Missis, she would feel
like goin' on with it, was it as Mas'r St. Clare's wish."

"I'll speak for you, Tom, and do my best," said Miss Ophelia; "but, if
it depends on Mrs. St. Clare, I can't hope much for you;--nevertheless,
I will try."

This incident occurred a few days after that of Rosa, while Miss Ophelia
was busied in preparations to return north.

Seriously reflecting within herself, she considered that perhaps she had
shown too hasty a warmth of language in her former interview with Marie;
and she resolved that she would now endeavor to moderate her zeal, and
to be as conciliatory as possible. So the good soul gathered herself
up, and, taking her knitting, resolved to go into Marie's room, be as
agreeable as possible, and negotiate Tom's case with all the diplomatic
skill of which she was mistress.

She found Marie reclining at length upon a lounge, supporting herself
on one elbow by pillows, while Jane, who had been out shopping, was
displaying before her certain samples of thin black stuffs.

"That will do," said Marie, selecting one; "only I'm not sure about its
being properly mourning."

"Laws, Missis," said Jane, volubly, "Mrs. General Derbennon wore just
this very thing, after the General died, last summer; it makes up
lovely!"

"What do you think?" said Marie to Miss Ophelia.

"It's a matter of custom, I suppose," said Miss Ophelia. "You can judge
about it better than I."

"The fact is," said Marie, "that I haven't a dress in the world that I
can wear; and, as I am going to break up the establishment, and go off,
next week, I must decide upon something."

"Are you going so soon?"

"Yes. St. Clare's brother has written, and he and the lawyer think that
the servants and furniture had better be put up at auction, and the
place left with our lawyer."

"There's one thing I wanted to speak with you about," said Miss Ophelia.
"Augustine promised Tom his liberty, and began the legal forms necessary
to it. I hope you will use your influence to have it perfected."

"Indeed, I shall do no such thing!" said Marie, sharply. "Tom is one of
the most valuable servants on the place,--it couldn't be afforded, any
way. Besides, what does he want of liberty? He's a great deal better off
as he is."

"But he does desire it, very earnestly, and his master promised it,"
said Miss Ophelia.

"I dare say he does want it," said Marie; "they all want it, just
because they are a discontented set,--always wanting what they haven't
got. Now, I'm principled against emancipating, in any case. Keep a negro
under the care of a master, and he does well enough, and is respectable;
but set them free, and they get lazy, and won't work, and take to
drinking, and go all down to be mean, worthless fellows, I've seen it
tried, hundreds of times. It's no favor to set them free."

"But Tom is so steady, industrious, and pious."

"O, you needn't tell me! I've see a hundred like him. He'll do very
well, as long as he's taken care of,--that's all."

"But, then, consider," said Miss Ophelia, "when you set him up for sale,
the chances of his getting a bad master."

"O, that's all humbug!" said Marie; "it isn't one time in a hundred that
a good fellow gets a bad master; most masters are good, for all the talk
that is made. I've lived and grown up here, in the South, and I
never yet was acquainted with a master that didn't treat his servants
well,--quite as well as is worth while. I don't feel any fears on that
head."

"Well," said Miss Ophelia, energetically, "I know it was one of the last
wishes of your husband that Tom should have his liberty; it was one of
the promises that he made to dear little Eva on her death-bed, and I
should not think you would feel at liberty to disregard it."

Marie had her face covered with her handkerchief at this appeal, and
began sobbing and using her smelling-bottle, with great vehemence.

"Everybody goes against me!" she said. "Everybody is so inconsiderate! I
shouldn't have expected that _you_ would bring up all these remembrances
of my troubles to me,--it's so inconsiderate! But nobody ever does
consider,--my trials are so peculiar! It's so hard, that when I had only
one daughter, she should have been taken!--and when I had a husband that
just exactly suited me,--and I'm so hard to be suited!--he should be
taken! And you seem to have so little feeling for me, and keep bringing
it up to me so carelessly,--when you know how it overcomes me! I suppose
you mean well; but it is very inconsiderate,--very!" And Marie sobbed,
and gasped for breath, and called Mammy to open the window, and to bring
her the camphor-bottle, and to bathe her head, and unhook her dress.
And, in the general confusion that ensued, Miss Ophelia made her escape
to her apartment.

She saw, at once, that it would do no good to say anything more; for
Marie had an indefinite capacity for hysteric fits; and, after this,
whenever her husband's or Eva's wishes with regard to the servants were
alluded to, she always found it convenient to set one in operation.
Miss Ophelia, therefore, did the next best thing she could for Tom,--she
wrote a letter to Mrs. Shelby for him, stating his troubles, and urging
them to send to his relief.

The next day, Tom and Adolph, and some half a dozen other servants,
were marched down to a slave-warehouse, to await the convenience of the
trader, who was going to make up a lot for auction.




The Slave Warehouse

A slave warehouse! Perhaps some of my readers conjure up horrible
visions of such a place. They fancy some foul, obscure den, some
horrible _Tartarus "informis, ingens, cui lumen ademptum."_ But no,
innocent friend; in these days men have learned the art of sinning
expertly and genteelly, so as not to shock the eyes and senses of
respectable society. Human property is high in the market; and is,
therefore, well fed, well cleaned, tended, and looked after, that it may
come to sale sleek, and strong, and shining. A slave-warehouse in New
Orleans is a house externally not much unlike many others, kept with
neatness; and where every day you may see arranged, under a sort of shed
along the outside, rows of men and women, who stand there as a sign of
the property sold within.

Then you shall be courteously entreated to call and examine, and shall
find an abundance of husbands, wives, brothers, sisters, fathers,
mothers, and young children, to be "sold separately, or in lots to suit
the convenience of the purchaser;" and that soul immortal, once bought
with blood and anguish by the Son of God, when the earth shook, and the
rocks rent, and the graves were opened, can be sold, leased, mortgaged,
exchanged for groceries or dry goods, to suit the phases of trade, or
the fancy of the purchaser.

It was a day or two after the conversation between Marie and Miss
Ophelia, that Tom, Adolph, and about half a dozen others of the St.
Clare estate, were turned over to the loving kindness of Mr. Skeggs, the
keeper of a depot on ---- street, to await the auction, next day.

Tom had with him quite a sizable trunk full of clothing, as had most
others of them. They were ushered, for the night, into a long room,
where many other men, of all ages, sizes, and shades of complexion, were
assembled, and from which roars of laughter and unthinking merriment
were proceeding.

"Ah, ha! that's right. Go it, boys,--go it!" said Mr. Skeggs, the
keeper. "My people are always so merry! Sambo, I see!" he said,
speaking approvingly to a burly negro who was performing tricks of low
buffoonery, which occasioned the shouts which Tom had heard.

As might be imagined, Tom was in no humor to join these proceedings;
and, therefore, setting his trunk as far as possible from the noisy
group, he sat down on it, and leaned his face against the wall.

The dealers in the human article make scrupulous and systematic efforts
to promote noisy mirth among them, as a means of drowning reflection,
and rendering them insensible to their condition. The whole object of
the training to which the negro is put, from the time he is sold in
the northern market till he arrives south, is systematically directed
towards making him callous, unthinking, and brutal. The slave-dealer
collects his gang in Virginia or Kentucky, and drives them to some
convenient, healthy place,--often a watering place,--to be fattened.
Here they are fed full daily; and, because some incline to pine, a
fiddle is kept commonly going among them, and they are made to dance
daily; and he who refuses to be merry--in whose soul thoughts of wife,
or child, or home, are too strong for him to be gay--is marked as sullen
and dangerous, and subjected to all the evils which the ill will of an
utterly irresponsible and hardened man can inflict upon him. Briskness,
alertness, and cheerfulness of appearance, especially before observers,
are constantly enforced upon them, both by the hope of thereby getting a
good master, and the fear of all that the driver may bring upon them if
they prove unsalable.

"What dat ar nigger doin here?" said Sambo, coming up to Tom, after Mr.
Skeggs had left the room. Sambo was a full black, of great size, very
lively, voluble, and full of trick and grimace.

"What you doin here?" said Sambo, coming up to Tom, and poking him
facetiously in the side. "Meditatin', eh?"

"I am to be sold at the auction tomorrow!" said Tom, quietly.

"Sold at auction,--haw! haw! boys, an't this yer fun? I wish't I was
gwine that ar way!--tell ye, wouldn't I make em laugh? But how is
it,--dis yer whole lot gwine tomorrow?" said Sambo, laying his hand
freely on Adolph's shoulder.

"Please to let me alone!" said Adolph, fiercely, straightening himself
up, with extreme disgust.

"Law, now, boys! dis yer's one o' yer white niggers,--kind o' cream
color, ye know, scented!" said he, coming up to Adolph and snuffing. "O
Lor! he'd do for a tobaccer-shop; they could keep him to scent snuff!
Lor, he'd keep a whole shope agwine,--he would!"

"I say, keep off, can't you?" said Adolph, enraged.

"Lor, now, how touchy we is,--we white niggers! Look at us now!" and
Sambo gave a ludicrous imitation of Adolph's manner; "here's de airs and
graces. We's been in a good family, I specs."

"Yes," said Adolph; "I had a master that could have bought you all for
old truck!"

"Laws, now, only think," said Sambo, "the gentlemens that we is!"

"I belonged to the St. Clare family," said Adolph, proudly.

"Lor, you did! Be hanged if they ar'n't lucky to get shet of ye. Spects
they's gwine to trade ye off with a lot o' cracked tea-pots and sich
like!" said Sambo, with a provoking grin.

Adolph, enraged at this taunt, flew furiously at his adversary, swearing
and striking on every side of him. The rest laughed and shouted, and the
uproar brought the keeper to the door.

"What now, boys? Order,--order!" he said, coming in and flourishing a
large whip.

All fled in different directions, except Sambo, who, presuming on the
favor which the keeper had to him as a licensed wag, stood his ground,
ducking his head with a facetious grin, whenever the master made a dive
at him.

"Lor, Mas'r, 'tan't us,--we 's reglar stiddy,--it's these yer new hands;
they 's real aggravatin',--kinder pickin' at us, all time!"

The keeper, at this, turned upon Tom and Adolph, and distributing a few
kicks and cuffs without much inquiry, and leaving general orders for all
to be good boys and go to sleep, left the apartment.

While this scene was going on in the men's sleeping-room, the reader may
be curious to take a peep at the corresponding apartment allotted to
the women. Stretched out in various attitudes over the floor, he may see
numberless sleeping forms of every shade of complexion, from the purest
ebony to white, and of all years, from childhood to old age, lying now
asleep. Here is a fine bright girl, of ten years, whose mother was sold
out yesterday, and who tonight cried herself to sleep when nobody was
looking at her. Here, a worn old negress, whose thin arms and callous
fingers tell of hard toil, waiting to be sold tomorrow, as a cast-off
article, for what can be got for her; and some forty or fifty others,
with heads variously enveloped in blankets or articles of clothing, lie
stretched around them. But, in a corner, sitting apart from the rest,
are two females of a more interesting appearance than common. One of
these is a respectably-dressed mulatto woman between forty and fifty,
with soft eyes and a gentle and pleasing physiognomy. She has on her
head a high-raised turban, made of a gay red Madras handkerchief, of the
first quality, her dress is neatly fitted, and of good material, showing
that she has been provided for with a careful hand. By her side, and
nestling closely to her, is a young girl of fifteen,--her daughter. She
is a quadroon, as may be seen from her fairer complexion, though her
likeness to her mother is quite discernible. She has the same soft, dark
eye, with longer lashes, and her curling hair is of a luxuriant brown.
She also is dressed with great neatness, and her white, delicate hands
betray very little acquaintance with servile toil. These two are to
be sold tomorrow, in the same lot with the St. Clare servants; and the
gentleman to whom they belong, and to whom the money for their sale is
to be transmitted, is a member of a Christian church in New York, who
will receive the money, and go thereafter to the sacrament of his Lord
and theirs, and think no more of it.

These two, whom we shall call Susan and Emmeline, had been the personal
attendants of an amiable and pious lady of New Orleans, by whom they had
been carefully and piously instructed and trained. They had been taught
to read and write, diligently instructed in the truths of religion, and
their lot had been as happy an one as in their condition it was possible
to be. But the only son of their protectress had the management of her
property; and, by carelessness and extravagance involved it to a
large amount, and at last failed. One of the largest creditors was
the respectable firm of B. & Co., in New York. B. & Co. wrote to their
lawyer in New Orleans, who attached the real estate (these two articles
and a lot of plantation hands formed the most valuable part of it), and
wrote word to that effect to New York. Brother B., being, as we have
said, a Christian man, and a resident in a free State, felt some
uneasiness on the subject. He didn't like trading in slaves and souls
of men,--of course, he didn't; but, then, there were thirty thousand
dollars in the case, and that was rather too much money to be lost for a
principle; and so, after much considering, and asking advice from those
that he knew would advise to suit him, Brother B. wrote to his lawyer to
dispose of the business in the way that seemed to him the most suitable,
and remit the proceeds.

The day after the letter arrived in New Orleans, Susan and Emmeline
were attached, and sent to the depot to await a general auction on the
following morning; and as they glimmer faintly upon us in the moonlight
which steals through the grated window, we may listen to their
conversation. Both are weeping, but each quietly, that the other may not
hear.

"Mother, just lay your head on my lap, and see if you can't sleep a
little," says the girl, trying to appear calm.

"I haven't any heart to sleep, Em; I can't; it's the last night we may
be together!"

"O, mother, don't say so! perhaps we shall get sold together,--who
knows?"

"If 't was anybody's else case, I should say so, too, Em," said the
woman; "but I'm so feard of losin' you that I don't see anything but the
danger."

"Why, mother, the man said we were both likely, and would sell well."

Susan remembered the man's looks and words. With a deadly sickness at
her heart, she remembered how he had looked at Emmeline's hands, and
lifted up her curly hair, and pronounced her a first-rate article. Susan
had been trained as a Christian, brought up in the daily reading of the
Bible, and had the same horror of her child's being sold to a life
of shame that any other Christian mother might have; but she had no
hope,--no protection.

"Mother, I think we might do first rate, if you could get a place as
cook, and I as chambermaid or seamstress, in some family. I dare say we
shall. Let's both look as bright and lively as we can, and tell all we
can do, and perhaps we shall," said Emmeline.

"I want you to brush your hair all back straight, tomorrow," said Susan.

"What for, mother? I don't look near so well, that way."

"Yes, but you'll sell better so."

"I don't see why!" said the child.

"Respectable families would be more apt to buy you, if they saw you
looked plain and decent, as if you wasn't trying to look handsome. I
know their ways better 'n you do," said Susan.

"Well, mother, then I will."

"And, Emmeline, if we shouldn't ever see each other again, after
tomorrow,--if I'm sold way up on a plantation somewhere, and you
somewhere else,--always remember how you've been brought up, and all
Missis has told you; take your Bible with you, and your hymn-book; and
if you're faithful to the Lord, he'll be faithful to you."

So speaks the poor soul, in sore discouragement; for she knows
that tomorrow any man, however vile and brutal, however godless and
merciless, if he only has money to pay for her, may become owner of her
daughter, body and soul; and then, how is the child to be faithful? She
thinks of all this, as she holds her daughter in her arms, and
wishes that she were not handsome and attractive. It seems almost an
aggravation to her to remember how purely and piously, how much above
the ordinary lot, she has been brought up. But she has no resort but to
_pray_; and many such prayers to God have gone up from those same trim,
neatly-arranged, respectable slave-prisons,--prayers which God has not
forgotten, as a coming day shall show; for it is written, "Who causeth
one of these little ones to offend, it were better for him that a
millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the
depths of the sea."

The soft, earnest, quiet moonbeam looks in fixedly, marking the bars
of the grated windows on the prostrate, sleeping forms. The mother and
daughter are singing together a wild and melancholy dirge, common as a
funeral hymn among the slaves:

     "O, where is weeping Mary?
     O, where is weeping Mary?
     'Rived in the goodly land.
     She is dead and gone to Heaven;
     She is dead and gone to Heaven;
     'Rived in the goodly land."

These words, sung by voices of a peculiar and melancholy sweetness, in
an air which seemed like the sighing of earthy despair after heavenly
hope, floated through the dark prison rooms with a pathetic cadence, as
verse after verse was breathed out:

     "O, where are Paul and Silas?
     O, where are Paul and Silas?
     Gone to the goodly land.
     They are dead and gone to Heaven;
     They are dead and gone to Heaven;
     'Rived in the goodly land."

Sing on poor souls! The night is short, and the morning will part you
forever!

But now it is morning, and everybody is astir; and the worthy Mr. Skeggs
is busy and bright, for a lot of goods is to be fitted out for auction.
There is a brisk lookout on the toilet; injunctions passed around
to every one to put on their best face and be spry; and now all are
arranged in a circle for a last review, before they are marched up to
the Bourse.

Mr. Skeggs, with his palmetto on and his cigar in his mouth, walks
around to put farewell touches on his wares.

"How's this?" he said, stepping in front of Susan and Emmeline. "Where's
your curls, gal?"

The girl looked timidly at her mother, who, with the smooth adroitness
common among her class, answers,

"I was telling her, last night, to put up her hair smooth and neat, and
not havin' it flying about in curls; looks more respectable so."

"Bother!" said the man, peremptorily, turning to the girl; "you go right
along, and curl yourself real smart!" He added, giving a crack to a
rattan he held in his hand, "And be back in quick time, too!"

"You go and help her," he added, to the mother. "Them curls may make a
hundred dollars difference in the sale of her."


Beneath a splendid dome were men of all nations, moving to and fro,
over the marble pave. On every side of the circular area were little
tribunes, or stations, for the use of speakers and auctioneers. Two of
these, on opposite sides of the area, were now occupied by brilliant and
talented gentlemen, enthusiastically forcing up, in English and French
commingled, the bids of connoisseurs in their various wares. A third
