hitting on rhyme, without much attempt at reason; and the party took up
the chorus, at intervals,

     "Ho! ho! ho! boys, ho!
     High--e--oh! high--e--oh!"

It was sung very boisterouly, and with a forced attempt at merriment;
but no wail of despair, no words of impassioned prayer, could have had
such a depth of woe in them as the wild notes of the chorus. As if
the poor, dumb heart, threatened,--prisoned,--took refuge in that
inarticulate sanctuary of music, and found there a language in which to
breathe its prayer to God! There was a prayer in it, which Simon could
not hear. He only heard the boys singing noisily, and was well pleased;
he was making them "keep up their spirits."

"Well, my little dear," said he, turning to Emmeline, and laying his
hand on her shoulder, "we're almost home!"

When Legree scolded and stormed, Emmeline was terrified; but when he
laid his hand on her, and spoke as he now did, she felt as if she had
rather he would strike her. The expression of his eyes made her soul
sick, and her flesh creep. Involuntarily she clung closer to the mulatto
woman by her side, as if she were her mother.

"You didn't ever wear ear-rings," he said, taking hold of her small ear
with his coarse fingers.

"No, Mas'r!" said Emmeline, trembling and looking down.

"Well, I'll give you a pair, when we get home, if you're a good girl.
You needn't be so frightened; I don't mean to make you work very hard.
You'll have fine times with me, and live like a lady,--only be a good
girl."

Legree had been drinking to that degree that he was inclining to be
very gracious; and it was about this time that the enclosures of the
plantation rose to view. The estate had formerly belonged to a gentleman
of opulence and taste, who had bestowed some considerable attention
to the adornment of his grounds. Having died insolvent, it had been
purchased, at a bargain, by Legree, who used it, as he did everything
else, merely as an implement for money-making. The place had that
ragged, forlorn appearance, which is always produced by the evidence
that the care of the former owner has been left to go to utter decay.

What was once a smooth-shaven lawn before the house, dotted here and
there with ornamental shrubs, was now covered with frowsy tangled
grass, with horseposts set up, here and there, in it, where the turf was
stamped away, and the ground littered with broken pails, cobs of corn,
and other slovenly remains. Here and there, a mildewed jessamine or
honeysuckle hung raggedly from some ornamental support, which had been
pushed to one side by being used as a horse-post. What once was a large
garden was now all grown over with weeds, through which, here and
there, some solitary exotic reared its forsaken head. What had been a
conservatory had now no window-shades, and on the mouldering shelves
stood some dry, forsaken flower-pots, with sticks in them, whose dried
leaves showed they had once been plants.

The wagon rolled up a weedy gravel walk, under a noble avenue of China
trees, whose graceful forms and ever-springing foliage seemed to be the
only things there that neglect could not daunt or alter,--like noble
spirits, so deeply rooted in goodness, as to flourish and grow stronger
amid discouragement and decay.

The house had been large and handsome. It was built in a manner common
at the South; a wide verandah of two stories running round every part
of the house, into which every outer door opened, the lower tier being
supported by brick pillars.

But the place looked desolate and uncomfortable; some windows stopped up
with boards, some with shattered panes, and shutters hanging by a single
hinge,--all telling of coarse neglect and discomfort.

Bits of board, straw, old decayed barrels and boxes, garnished the
ground in all directions; and three or four ferocious-looking dogs,
roused by the sound of the wagon-wheels, came tearing out, and were with
difficulty restrained from laying hold of Tom and his companions, by the
effort of the ragged servants who came after them.

"Ye see what ye'd get!" said Legree, caressing the dogs with grim
satisfaction, and turning to Tom and his companions. "Ye see what ye'd
get, if ye try to run off. These yer dogs has been raised to track
niggers; and they'd jest as soon chaw one on ye up as eat their supper.
So, mind yerself! How now, Sambo!" he said, to a ragged fellow, without
any brim to his hat, who was officious in his attentions. "How have
things been going?"

"Fust rate, Mas'r."

"Quimbo," said Legree to another, who was making zealous demonstrations
to attract his attention, "ye minded what I telled ye?"

"Guess I did, didn't I?"

These two colored men were the two principal hands on the plantation.
Legree had trained them in savageness and brutality as systematically
as he had his bull-dogs; and, by long practice in hardness and cruelty,
brought their whole nature to about the same range of capacities. It is
a common remark, and one that is thought to militate strongly against
the character of the race, that the negro overseer is always more
tyrannical and cruel than the white one. This is simply saying that the
negro mind has been more crushed and debased than the white. It is no
more true of this race than of every oppressed race, the world over. The
slave is always a tyrant, if he can get a chance to be one.

Legree, like some potentates we read of in history, governed his
plantation by a sort of resolution of forces. Sambo and Quimbo cordially
hated each other; the plantation hands, one and all, cordially hated
them; and, by playing off one against another, he was pretty sure,
through one or the other of the three parties, to get informed of
whatever was on foot in the place.

Nobody can live entirely without social intercourse; and Legree
encouraged his two black satellites to a kind of coarse familiarity with
him,--a familiarity, however, at any moment liable to get one or the
other of them into trouble; for, on the slightest provocation, one of
them always stood ready, at a nod, to be a minister of his vengeance on
the other.

As they stood there now by Legree, they seemed an apt illustration of
the fact that brutal men are lower even than animals. Their coarse,
dark, heavy features; their great eyes, rolling enviously on each other;
their barbarous, guttural, half-brute intonation; their dilapidated
garments fluttering in the wind,--were all in admirable keeping with the
vile and unwholesome character of everything about the place.

"Here, you Sambo," said Legree, "take these yer boys down to the
quarters; and here's a gal I've got for _you_," said he, as he separated
the mulatto woman from Emmeline, and pushed her towards him;--"I
promised to bring you one, you know."

The woman gave a start, and drawing back, said, suddenly,

"O, Mas'r! I left my old man in New Orleans."

"What of that, you--; won't you want one here? None o' your words,--go
long!" said Legree, raising his whip.

"Come, mistress," he said to Emmeline, "you go in here with me."

A dark, wild face was seen, for a moment, to glance at the window of the
house; and, as Legree opened the door, a female voice said something, in
a quick, imperative tone. Tom, who was looking, with anxious interest,
after Emmeline, as she went in, noticed this, and heard Legree answer,
angrily, "You may hold your tongue! I'll do as I please, for all you!"

Tom heard no more; for he was soon following Sambo to the quarters. The
quarters was a little sort of street of rude shanties, in a row, in
a part of the plantation, far off from the house. They had a forlorn,
brutal, forsaken air. Tom's heart sunk when he saw them. He had been
comforting himself with the thought of a cottage, rude, indeed, but one
which he might make neat and quiet, and where he might have a shelf for
his Bible, and a place to be alone out of his laboring hours. He looked
into several; they were mere rude shells, destitute of any species of
furniture, except a heap of straw, foul with dirt, spread confusedly
over the floor, which was merely the bare ground, trodden hard by the
tramping of innumerable feet.

"Which of these will be mine?" said he, to Sambo, submissively.

"Dunno; ken turn in here, I spose," said Sambo; "spects thar's room for
another thar; thar's a pretty smart heap o' niggers to each on 'em, now;
sure, I dunno what I 's to do with more."


It was late in the evening when the weary occupants of the shanties came
flocking home,--men and women, in soiled and tattered garments, surly
and uncomfortable, and in no mood to look pleasantly on new-comers. The
small village was alive with no inviting sounds; hoarse, guttural voices
contending at the hand-mills where their morsel of hard corn was yet to
be ground into meal, to fit it for the cake that was to constitute their
only supper. From the earliest dawn of the day, they had been in the
fields, pressed to work under the driving lash of the overseers; for it
was now in the very heat and hurry of the season, and no means was left
untried to press every one up to the top of their capabilities. "True,"
says the negligent lounger; "picking cotton isn't hard work." Isn't it?
And it isn't much inconvenience, either, to have one drop of water fall
on your head; yet the worst torture of the inquisition is produced by
drop after drop, drop after drop, falling moment after moment, with
monotonous succession, on the same spot; and work, in itself not
hard, becomes so, by being pressed, hour after hour, with unvarying,
unrelenting sameness, with not even the consciousness of free-will to
take from its tediousness. Tom looked in vain among the gang, as they
poured along, for companionable faces. He saw only sullen, scowling,
imbruted men, and feeble, discouraged women, or women that were not
women,--the strong pushing away the weak,--the gross, unrestricted
animal selfishness of human beings, of whom nothing good was expected
and desired; and who, treated in every way like brutes, had sunk as
nearly to their level as it was possible for human beings to do. To a
late hour in the night the sound of the grinding was protracted; for the
mills were few in number compared with the grinders, and the weary and
feeble ones were driven back by the strong, and came on last in their
turn.

"Ho yo!" said Sambo, coming to the mulatto woman, and throwing down a
bag of corn before her; "what a cuss yo name?"

"Lucy," said the woman.

"Wal, Lucy, yo my woman now. Yo grind dis yer corn, and get _my_ supper
baked, ye har?"

"I an't your woman, and I won't be!" said the woman, with the sharp,
sudden courage of despair; "you go 'long!"

"I'll kick yo, then!" said Sambo, raising his foot threateningly.

"Ye may kill me, if ye choose,--the sooner the better! Wish't I was
dead!" said she.

"I say, Sambo, you go to spilin' the hands, I'll tell Mas'r o' you,"
said Quimbo, who was busy at the mill, from which he had viciously
driven two or three tired women, who were waiting to grind their corn.

"And, I'll tell him ye won't let the women come to the mills, yo old
nigger!" said Sambo. "Yo jes keep to yo own row."

Tom was hungry with his day's journey, and almost faint for want of
food.

"Thar, yo!" said Quimbo, throwing down a coarse bag, which contained
a peck of corn; "thar, nigger, grab, take car on 't,--yo won't get no
more, _dis_ yer week."

Tom waited till a late hour, to get a place at the mills; and then,
moved by the utter weariness of two women, whom he saw trying to grind
their corn there, he ground for them, put together the decaying brands
of the fire, where many had baked cakes before them, and then went about
getting his own supper. It was a new kind of work there,--a deed of
charity, small as it was; but it woke an answering touch in their
hearts,--an expression of womanly kindness came over their hard faces;
they mixed his cake for him, and tended its baking; and Tom sat down
by the light of the fire, and drew out his Bible,--for he had need for
comfort.

"What's that?" said one of the woman.

"A Bible," said Tom.

"Good Lord! han't seen un since I was in Kentuck."

"Was you raised in Kentuck?" said Tom, with interest.

"Yes, and well raised, too; never 'spected to come to dis yer!" said the
woman, sighing.

"What's dat ar book, any way?" said the other woman.

"Why, the Bible."

"Laws a me! what's dat?" said the woman.

"Do tell! you never hearn on 't?" said the other woman. "I used to har
Missis a readin' on 't, sometimes, in Kentuck; but, laws o' me! we don't
har nothin' here but crackin' and swarin'."

"Read a piece, anyways!" said the first woman, curiously, seeing Tom
attentively poring over it.

Tom read,--"Come unto Me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I
will give you rest."

"Them's good words, enough," said the woman; "who says 'em?"

"The Lord," said Tom.

"I jest wish I know'd whar to find Him," said the woman. "I would go;
'pears like I never should get rested again. My flesh is fairly sore,
and I tremble all over, every day, and Sambo's allers a jawin' at me,
'cause I doesn't pick faster; and nights it's most midnight 'fore I can
get my supper; and den 'pears like I don't turn over and shut my eyes,
'fore I hear de horn blow to get up, and at it agin in de mornin'. If I
knew whar de Lor was, I'd tell him."

"He's here, he's everywhere," said Tom.

"Lor, you an't gwine to make me believe dat ar! I know de Lord an't
here," said the woman; "'tan't no use talking, though. I's jest gwine to
camp down, and sleep while I ken."

The women went off to their cabins, and Tom sat alone, by the
smouldering fire, that flickered up redly in his face.

The silver, fair-browed moon rose in the purple sky, and looked
down, calm and silent, as God looks on the scene of misery and
oppression,--looked calmly on the lone black man, as he sat, with his
arms folded, and his Bible on his knee.

"Is God HERE?" Ah, how is it possible for the untaught heart to keep its
faith, unswerving, in the face of dire misrule, and palpable, unrebuked
injustice? In that simple heart waged a fierce conflict; the crushing
sense of wrong, the foreshadowing, of a whole life of future misery, the
wreck of all past hopes, mournfully tossing in the soul's sight, like
dead corpses of wife, and child, and friend, rising from the dark wave,
and surging in the face of the half-drowned mariner! Ah, was it easy
_here_ to believe and hold fast the great password of Christian faith,
that "God IS, and is the REWARDER of them that diligently seek Him"?

Tom rose, disconsolate, and stumbled into the cabin that had been
allotted to him. The floor was already strewn with weary sleepers, and
the foul air of the place almost repelled him; but the heavy night-dews
were chill, and his limbs weary, and, wrapping about him a tattered
blanket, which formed his only bed-clothing, he stretched himself in the
straw and fell asleep.

In dreams, a gentle voice came over his ear; he was sitting on the mossy
seat in the garden by Lake Pontchartrain, and Eva, with her serious eyes
bent downward, was reading to him from the Bible; and he heard her read.

"When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and the
rivers they shall not overflow thee; when thou walkest through the fire,
thou shalt not be burned, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee; for
I am the Lord thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Saviour."

Gradually the words seemed to melt and fade, as in a divine music; the
child raised her deep eyes, and fixed them lovingly on him, and rays
of warmth and comfort seemed to go from them to his heart; and, as if
wafted on the music, she seemed to rise on shining wings, from which
flakes and spangles of gold fell off like stars, and she was gone.

Tom woke. Was it a dream? Let it pass for one. But who shall say that
that sweet young spirit, which in life so yearned to comfort and console
the distressed, was forbidden of God to assume this ministry after
death?

     It is a beautiful belief,
     That ever round our head
     Are hovering, on angel wings,
     The spirits of the dead.




Cassy


"And behold, the tears of such as were oppressed, and they had no
comforter; and on the side of their oppressors there was power, but they
had no comforter."--ECCL. 4:1

It took but a short time to familiarize Tom with all that was to be
hoped or feared in his new way of life. He was an expert and efficient
workman in whatever he undertook; and was, both from habit and
principle, prompt and faithful. Quiet and peaceable in his disposition,
he hoped, by unremitting diligence, to avert from himself at least a
portion of the evils of his condition. He saw enough of abuse and misery
to make him sick and weary; but he determined to toil on, with religious
patience, committing himself to Him that judgeth righteously, not
without hope that some way of escape might yet be opened to him.

Legree took a silent note of Tom's availability. He rated him as a
first-class hand; and yet he felt a secret dislike to him,--the native
antipathy of bad to good. He saw, plainly, that when, as was often the
case, his violence and brutality fell on the helpless, Tom took notice
of it; for, so subtle is the atmosphere of opinion, that it will make
itself felt, without words; and the opinion even of a slave may annoy
a master. Tom in various ways manifested a tenderness of feeling, a
commiseration for his fellow-sufferers, strange and new to them, which
was watched with a jealous eye by Legree. He had purchased Tom with a
view of eventually making him a sort of overseer, with whom he might,
at times, intrust his affairs, in short absences; and, in his view,
the first, second, and third requisite for that place, was _hardness_.
Legree made up his mind, that, as Tom was not hard to his hand, he
would harden him forthwith; and some few weeks after Tom had been on the
place, he determined to commence the process.

One morning, when the hands were mustered for the field, Tom noticed,
with surprise, a new comer among them, whose appearance excited his
attention. It was a woman, tall and slenderly formed, with remarkably
delicate hands and feet, and dressed in neat and respectable garments.
By the appearance of her face, she might have been between thirty-five
and forty; and it was a face that, once seen, could never be
forgotten,--one of those that, at a glance, seem to convey to us an idea
of a wild, painful, and romantic history. Her forehead was high, and
her eyebrows marked with beautiful clearness. Her straight, well-formed
nose, her finely-cut mouth, and the graceful contour of her head and
neck, showed that she must once have been beautiful; but her face was
deeply wrinkled with lines of pain, and of proud and bitter endurance.
Her complexion was sallow and unhealthy, her cheeks thin, her features
sharp, and her whole form emaciated. But her eye was the most remarkable
feature,--so large, so heavily black, overshadowed by long lashes of
equal darkness, and so wildly, mournfully despairing. There was a fierce
pride and defiance in every line of her face, in every curve of the
flexible lip, in every motion of her body; but in her eye was a deep,
settled night of anguish,--an expression so hopeless and unchanging as
to contrast fearfully with the scorn and pride expressed by her whole
demeanor.

Where she came from, or who she was, Tom did not know. The first he did
know, she was walking by his side, erect and proud, in the dim gray
of the dawn. To the gang, however, she was known; for there was much
looking and turning of heads, and a smothered yet apparent exultation
among the miserable, ragged, half-starved creatures by whom she was
surrounded.

"Got to come to it, at last,--glad of it!" said one.

"He! he! he!" said another; "you'll know how good it is, Misse!"

"We'll see her work!"

"Wonder if she'll get a cutting up, at night, like the rest of us!"

"I'd be glad to see her down for a flogging, I'll bound!" said another.

The woman took no notice of these taunts, but walked on, with the same
expression of angry scorn, as if she heard nothing. Tom had always lived
among refined, and cultivated people, and he felt intuitively, from her
air and bearing, that she belonged to that class; but how or why she
could be fallen to those degrading circumstances, he could not tell. The
women neither looked at him nor spoke to him, though, all the way to the
field, she kept close at his side.

Tom was soon busy at his work; but, as the woman was at no great
distance from him, he often glanced an eye to her, at her work. He saw,
at a glance, that a native adroitness and handiness made the task to
her an easier one than it proved to many. She picked very fast and very
clean, and with an air of scorn, as if she despised both the work and
the disgrace and humiliation of the circumstances in which she was
placed.

In the course of the day, Tom was working near the mulatto woman who
had been bought in the same lot with himself. She was evidently in a
condition of great suffering, and Tom often heard her praying, as she
wavered and trembled, and seemed about to fall down. Tom silently as he
came near to her, transferred several handfuls of cotton from his own
sack to hers.

"O, don't, don't!" said the woman, looking surprised; "it'll get you
into trouble."

Just then Sambo came up. He seemed to have a special spite against this
woman; and, flourishing his whip, said, in brutal, guttural tones, "What
dis yer, Luce,--foolin' a'" and, with the word, kicking the woman with
his heavy cowhide shoe, he struck Tom across the face with his whip.

Tom silently resumed his task; but the woman, before at the last point
of exhaustion, fainted.

"I'll bring her to!" said the driver, with a brutal grin. "I'll give her
something better than camphire!" and, taking a pin from his coat-sleeve,
he buried it to the head in her flesh. The woman groaned, and half rose.
"Get up, you beast, and work, will yer, or I'll show yer a trick more!"

The woman seemed stimulated, for a few moments, to an unnatural
strength, and worked with desperate eagerness.

"See that you keep to dat ar," said the man, "or yer'll wish yer's dead
tonight, I reckin!"

"That I do now!" Tom heard her say; and again he heard her say, "O,
Lord, how long! O, Lord, why don't you help us?"

At the risk of all that he might suffer, Tom came forward again, and put
all the cotton in his sack into the woman's.

"O, you mustn't! you donno what they'll do to ye!" said the woman.

"I can bar it!" said Tom, "better 'n you;" and he was at his place
again. It passed in a moment.

Suddenly, the stranger woman whom we have described, and who had, in the
course of her work, come near enough to hear Tom's last words, raised
her heavy black eyes, and fixed them, for a second, on him; then, taking
a quantity of cotton from her basket, she placed it in his.

"You know nothing about this place," she said, "or you wouldn't have
done that. When you've been here a month, you'll be done helping
anybody; you'll find it hard enough to take care of your own skin!"

"The Lord forbid, Missis!" said Tom, using instinctively to his field
companion the respectful form proper to the high bred with whom he had
lived.

"The Lord never visits these parts," said the woman, bitterly, as she
went nimbly forward with her work; and again the scornful smile curled
her lips.

But the action of the woman had been seen by the driver, across the
field; and, flourishing his whip, he came up to her.

"What! what!" he said to the woman, with an air of triumph, "You a
foolin'? Go along! yer under me now,--mind yourself, or yer'll cotch
it!"

A glance like sheet-lightning suddenly flashed from those black eyes;
and, facing about, with quivering lip and dilated nostrils, she drew
herself up, and fixed a glance, blazing with rage and scorn, on the
driver.

"Dog!" she said, "touch _me_, if you dare! I've power enough, yet, to
have you torn by the dogs, burnt alive, cut to inches! I've only to say
the word!"

"What de devil you here for, den?" said the man, evidently cowed, and
sullenly retreating a step or two. "Didn't mean no harm, Misse Cassy!"

"Keep your distance, then!" said the woman. And, in truth, the man
seemed greatly inclined to attend to something at the other end of the
field, and started off in quick time.

