feeling, they will show it,--they can't help it; but, then, it's a great
misfortune to have feeling. I'd rather have been made like St. Clare. My
feelings prey upon me so!"

"Sure, Missis, Mas'r St. Clare is gettin' thin as a shader. They say, he
don't never eat nothin'," said Mammy. "I know he don't forget Miss Eva;
I know there couldn't nobody,--dear, little, blessed cretur!" she added,
wiping her eyes.

"Well, at all events, he has no consideration for me," said Marie; "he
hasn't spoken one word of sympathy, and he must know how much more a
mother feels than any man can."

"The heart knoweth its own bitterness," said Miss Ophelia, gravely.

"That's just what I think. I know just what I feel,--nobody else seems
to. Eva used to, but she is gone!" and Marie lay back on her lounge, and
began to sob disconsolately.

Marie was one of those unfortunately constituted mortals, in whose
eyes whatever is lost and gone assumes a value which it never had in
possession. Whatever she had, she seemed to survey only to pick flaws in
it; but, once fairly away, there was no end to her valuation of it.

While this conversation was taking place in the parlor another was going
on in St. Clare's library.

Tom, who was always uneasily following his master about, had seen him go
to his library, some hours before; and, after vainly waiting for him to
come out, determined, at last, to make an errand in. He entered softly.
St. Clare lay on his lounge, at the further end of the room. He was
lying on his face, with Eva's Bible open before him, at a little
distance. Tom walked up, and stood by the sofa. He hesitated; and, while
he was hesitating, St. Clare suddenly raised himself up. The honest
face, so full of grief, and with such an imploring expression of
affection and sympathy, struck his master. He laid his hand on Tom's,
and bowed down his forehead on it.

"O, Tom, my boy, the whole world is as empty as an egg-shell."

"I know it, Mas'r,--I know it," said Tom; "but, oh, if Mas'r could only
look up,--up where our dear Miss Eva is,--up to the dear Lord Jesus!"

"Ah, Tom! I do look up; but the trouble is, I don't see anything, when I
do, I wish I could."

Tom sighed heavily.

"It seems to be given to children, and poor, honest fellows, like you,
to see what we can't," said St. Clare. "How comes it?"

"Thou has 'hid from the wise and prudent, and revealed unto babes,'"
murmured Tom; "'even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight.'"

"Tom, I don't believe,--I can't believe,--I've got the habit of
doubting," said St. Clare. "I want to believe this Bible,--and I can't."

"Dear Mas'r, pray to the good Lord,--'Lord, I believe; help thou my
unbelief.'"

"Who knows anything about anything?" said St. Clare, his eyes wandering
dreamily, and speaking to himself. "Was all that beautiful love and
faith only one of the ever-shifting phases of human feeling, having
nothing real to rest on, passing away with the little breath? And is
there no more Eva,--no heaven,--no Christ,--nothing?"

"O, dear Mas'r, there is! I know it; I'm sure of it," said Tom, falling
on his knees. "Do, do, dear Mas'r, believe it!"

"How do you know there's any Christ, Tom! You never saw the Lord."

"Felt Him in my soul, Mas'r,--feel Him now! O, Mas'r, when I was sold
away from my old woman and the children, I was jest a'most broke up. I
felt as if there warn't nothin' left; and then the good Lord, he stood
by me, and he says, 'Fear not, Tom;' and he brings light and joy in
a poor feller's soul,--makes all peace; and I 's so happy, and loves
everybody, and feels willin' jest to be the Lord's, and have the Lord's
will done, and be put jest where the Lord wants to put me. I know it
couldn't come from me, cause I 's a poor, complainin' cretur; it comes
from the Lord; and I know He's willin' to do for Mas'r."

Tom spoke with fast-running tears and choking voice. St. Clare leaned
his head on his shoulder, and wrung the hard, faithful, black hand.

"Tom, you love me," he said.

"I 's willin' to lay down my life, this blessed day, to see Mas'r a
Christian."

"Poor, foolish boy!" said St. Clare, half-raising himself. "I'm not
worth the love of one good, honest heart, like yours."

"O, Mas'r, dere's more than me loves you,--the blessed Lord Jesus loves
you."

"How do you know that Tom?" said St. Clare.

"Feels it in my soul. O, Mas'r! 'the love of Christ, that passeth
knowledge.'"

"Singular!" said St. Clare, turning away, "that the story of a man that
lived and died eighteen hundred years ago can affect people so yet.
But he was no man," he added, suddenly. "No man ever had such long and
living power! O, that I could believe what my mother taught me, and pray
as I did when I was a boy!"

"If Mas'r pleases," said Tom, "Miss Eva used to read this so
beautifully. I wish Mas'r'd be so good as read it. Don't get no readin',
hardly, now Miss Eva's gone."

The chapter was the eleventh of John,--the touching account of the
raising of Lazarus, St. Clare read it aloud, often pausing to wrestle
down feelings which were roused by the pathos of the story. Tom knelt
before him, with clasped hands, and with an absorbed expression of love,
trust, adoration, on his quiet face.

"Tom," said his Master, "this is all _real_ to you!"

"I can jest fairly _see_ it Mas'r," said Tom.

"I wish I had your eyes, Tom."

"I wish, to the dear Lord, Mas'r had!"

"But, Tom, you know that I have a great deal more knowledge than you;
what if I should tell you that I don't believe this Bible?"

"O, Mas'r!" said Tom, holding up his hands, with a deprecating gesture.

"Wouldn't it shake your faith some, Tom?"

"Not a grain," said Tom.

"Why, Tom, you must know I know the most."

"O, Mas'r, haven't you jest read how he hides from the wise and prudent,
and reveals unto babes? But Mas'r wasn't in earnest, for sartin, now?"
said Tom, anxiously.

"No, Tom, I was not. I don't disbelieve, and I think there is reason to
believe; and still I don't. It's a troublesome bad habit I've got, Tom."

"If Mas'r would only pray!"

"How do you know I don't, Tom?"

"Does Mas'r?"

"I would, Tom, if there was anybody there when I pray; but it's all
speaking unto nothing, when I do. But come, Tom, you pray now, and show
me how."

Tom's heart was full; he poured it out in prayer, like waters that have
been long suppressed. One thing was plain enough; Tom thought there was
somebody to hear, whether there were or not. In fact, St. Clare felt
himself borne, on the tide of his faith and feeling, almost to the gates
of that heaven he seemed so vividly to conceive. It seemed to bring him
nearer to Eva.

"Thank you, my boy," said St. Clare, when Tom rose. "I like to hear you,
Tom; but go, now, and leave me alone; some other time, I'll talk more."

Tom silently left the room.




Reunion


Week after week glided away in the St. Clare mansion, and the waves of
life settled back to their usual flow, where that little bark had
gone down. For how imperiously, how coolly, in disregard of all one's
feeling, does the hard, cold, uninteresting course of daily realities
move on! Still must we eat, and drink, and sleep, and wake again,--still
bargain, buy, sell, ask and answer questions,--pursue, in short,
a thousand shadows, though all interest in them be over; the cold
mechanical habit of living remaining, after all vital interest in it has
fled.

All the interests and hopes of St. Clare's life had unconsciously wound
themselves around this child. It was for Eva that he had managed his
property; it was for Eva that he had planned the disposal of his time;
and, to do this and that for Eva,--to buy, improve, alter, and arrange,
or dispose something for her,--had been so long his habit, that now she
was gone, there seemed nothing to be thought of, and nothing to be done.

True, there was another life,--a life which, once believed in, stands as
a solemn, significant figure before the otherwise unmeaning ciphers of
time, changing them to orders of mysterious, untold value. St. Clare
knew this well; and often, in many a weary hour, he heard that slender,
childish voice calling him to the skies, and saw that little hand
pointing to him the way of life; but a heavy lethargy of sorrow lay on
him,--he could not arise. He had one of those natures which could better
and more clearly conceive of religious things from its own perceptions
and instincts, than many a matter-of-fact and practical Christian. The
gift to appreciate and the sense to feel the finer shades and relations
of moral things, often seems an attribute of those whose whole life
shows a careless disregard of them. Hence Moore, Byron, Goethe, often
speak words more wisely descriptive of the true religious sentiment,
than another man, whose whole life is governed by it. In such minds,
disregard of religion is a more fearful treason,--a more deadly sin.

St. Clare had never pretended to govern himself by any religious
obligation; and a certain fineness of nature gave him such an
instinctive view of the extent of the requirements of Christianity, that
he shrank, by anticipation, from what he felt would be the exactions
of his own conscience, if he once did resolve to assume them. For,
so inconsistent is human nature, especially in the ideal, that not to
undertake a thing at all seems better than to undertake and come short.

Still St. Clare was, in many respects, another man. He read his
little Eva's Bible seriously and honestly; he thought more soberly
and practically of his relations to his servants,--enough to make him
extremely dissatisfied with both his past and present course; and one
thing he did, soon after his return to New Orleans, and that was to
commence the legal steps necessary to Tom's emancipation, which was to
be perfected as soon as he could get through the necessary formalities.
Meantime, he attached himself to Tom more and more, every day. In all
the wide world, there was nothing that seemed to remind him so much
of Eva; and he would insist on keeping him constantly about him, and,
fastidious and unapproachable as he was with regard to his deeper
feelings, he almost thought aloud to Tom. Nor would any one have
wondered at it, who had seen the expression of affection and devotion
with which Tom continually followed his young master.

"Well, Tom," said St. Clare, the day after he had commenced the legal
formalities for his enfranchisement, "I'm going to make a free man of
you;--so have your trunk packed, and get ready to set out for Kentuck."

The sudden light of joy that shone in Tom's face as he raised his hands
to heaven, his emphatic "Bless the Lord!" rather discomposed St. Clare;
he did not like it that Tom should be so ready to leave him.

"You haven't had such very bad times here, that you need be in such a
rapture, Tom," he said drily.

"No, no, Mas'r! 'tan't that,--it's bein' a _freeman!_ that's what I'm
joyin' for."

"Why, Tom, don't you think, for your own part, you've been better off
than to be free?"

"_No, indeed_, Mas'r St. Clare," said Tom, with a flash of energy. "No,
indeed!"

"Why, Tom, you couldn't possibly have earned, by your work, such clothes
and such living as I have given you."

"Knows all that, Mas'r St. Clare; Mas'r's been too good; but, Mas'r,
I'd rather have poor clothes, poor house, poor everything, and have 'em
_mine_, than have the best, and have 'em any man's else,--I had _so_,
Mas'r; I think it's natur, Mas'r."

"I suppose so, Tom, and you'll be going off and leaving me, in a month
or so," he added, rather discontentedly. "Though why you shouldn't, no
mortal knows," he said, in a gayer tone; and, getting up, he began to
walk the floor.

"Not while Mas'r is in trouble," said Tom. "I'll stay with Mas'r as long
as he wants me,--so as I can be any use."

"Not while I'm in trouble, Tom?" said St. Clare, looking sadly out of
the window. . . . "And when will _my_ trouble be over?"

"When Mas'r St. Clare's a Christian," said Tom.

"And you really mean to stay by till that day comes?" said St. Clare,
half smiling, as he turned from the window, and laid his hand on Tom's
shoulder. "Ah, Tom, you soft, silly boy! I won't keep you till that day.
Go home to your wife and children, and give my love to all."

"I 's faith to believe that day will come," said Tom, earnestly, and
with tears in his eyes; "the Lord has a work for Mas'r."

"A work, hey?" said St. Clare, "well, now, Tom, give me your views on
what sort of a work it is;--let's hear."

"Why, even a poor fellow like me has a work from the Lord; and Mas'r St.
Clare, that has larnin, and riches, and friends,--how much he might do
for the Lord!"

"Tom, you seem to think the Lord needs a great deal done for him," said
St. Clare, smiling.

"We does for the Lord when we does for his critturs," said Tom.

"Good theology, Tom; better than Dr. B. preaches, I dare swear," said
St. Clare.

The conversation was here interrupted by the announcement of some
visitors.

Marie St. Clare felt the loss of Eva as deeply as she could feel
anything; and, as she was a woman that had a great faculty of making
everybody unhappy when she was, her immediate attendants had still
stronger reason to regret the loss of their young mistress, whose
winning ways and gentle intercessions had so often been a shield to them
from the tyrannical and selfish exactions of her mother. Poor old Mammy,
in particular, whose heart, severed from all natural domestic ties, had
consoled itself with this one beautiful being, was almost heart-broken.
She cried day and night, and was, from excess of sorrow, less skilful
and alert in her ministrations of her mistress than usual, which drew
down a constant storm of invectives on her defenceless head.

Miss Ophelia felt the loss; but, in her good and honest heart, it bore
fruit unto everlasting life. She was more softened, more gentle; and,
though equally assiduous in every duty, it was with a chastened and
quiet air, as one who communed with her own heart not in vain. She was
more diligent in teaching Topsy,--taught her mainly from the Bible,--did
not any longer shrink from her touch, or manifest an ill-repressed
disgust, because she felt none. She viewed her now through the softened
medium that Eva's hand had first held before her eyes, and saw in her
only an immortal creature, whom God had sent to be led by her to glory
and virtue. Topsy did not become at once a saint; but the life and death
of Eva did work a marked change in her. The callous indifference was
gone; there was now sensibility, hope, desire, and the striving for
good,--a strife irregular, interrupted, suspended oft, but yet renewed
again.

One day, when Topsy had been sent for by Miss Ophelia, she came, hastily
thrusting something into her bosom.

"What are you doing there, you limb? You've been stealing something,
I'll be bound," said the imperious little Rosa, who had been sent to
call her, seizing her, at the same time, roughly by the arm.

"You go 'long, Miss Rosa!" said Topsy, pulling from her; "'tan't none o'
your business!"

"None o' your sa'ce!" said Rosa, "I saw you hiding something,--I know
yer tricks," and Rosa seized her arm, and tried to force her hand into
her bosom, while Topsy, enraged, kicked and fought valiantly for what
she considered her rights. The clamor and confusion of the battle drew
Miss Ophelia and St. Clare both to the spot.

"She's been stealing!" said Rosa.

"I han't, neither!" vociferated Topsy, sobbing with passion.

"Give me that, whatever it is!" said Miss Ophelia, firmly.

Topsy hesitated; but, on a second order, pulled out of her bosom a
little parcel done up in the foot of one of her own old stockings.

Miss Ophelia turned it out. There was a small book, which had been given
to Topsy by Eva, containing a single verse of Scripture, arranged for
every day in the year, and in a paper the curl of hair that she had
given her on that memorable day when she had taken her last farewell.

St. Clare was a good deal affected at the sight of it; the little book
had been rolled in a long strip of black crape, torn from the funeral
weeds.

"What did you wrap _this_ round the book for?" said St. Clare, holding
up the crape.

"Cause,--cause,--cause 't was Miss Eva. O, don't take 'em away, please!"
she said; and, sitting flat down on the floor, and putting her apron
over her head, she began to sob vehemently.

It was a curious mixture of the pathetic and the ludicrous,--the little
old stockings,--black crape,--text-book,--fair, soft curl,--and Topsy's
utter distress.

St. Clare smiled; but there were tears in his eyes, as he said,

"Come, come,--don't cry; you shall have them!" and, putting them
together, he threw them into her lap, and drew Miss Ophelia with him
into the parlor.

"I really think you can make something of that concern," he said,
pointing with his thumb backward over his shoulder. "Any mind that
is capable of a _real sorrow_ is capable of good. You must try and do
something with her."

"The child has improved greatly," said Miss Ophelia. "I have great hopes
of her; but, Augustine," she said, laying her hand on his arm, "one
thing I want to ask; whose is this child to be?--yours or mine?"

"Why, I gave her to you," said Augustine.

"But not legally;--I want her to be mine legally," said Miss Ophelia.

"Whew! cousin," said Augustine. "What will the Abolition Society think?
They'll have a day of fasting appointed for this backsliding, if you
become a slaveholder!"

"O, nonsense! I want her mine, that I may have a right to take her to
the free States, and give her her liberty, that all I am trying to do be
not undone."

"O, cousin, what an awful 'doing evil that good may come'! I can't
encourage it."

"I don't want you to joke, but to reason," said Miss Ophelia. "There is
no use in my trying to make this child a Christian child, unless I save
her from all the chances and reverses of slavery; and, if you really are
willing I should have her, I want you to give me a deed of gift, or some
legal paper."

"Well, well," said St. Clare, "I will;" and he sat down, and unfolded a
newspaper to read.

"But I want it done now," said Miss Ophelia.

"What's your hurry?"

"Because now is the only time there ever is to do a thing in," said Miss
Ophelia. "Come, now, here's paper, pen, and ink; just write a paper."

St. Clare, like most men of his class of mind, cordially hated the
present tense of action, generally; and, therefore, he was considerably
annoyed by Miss Ophelia's downrightness.

"Why, what's the matter?" said he. "Can't you take my word? One would
think you had taken lessons of the Jews, coming at a fellow so!"

"I want to make sure of it," said Miss Ophelia. "You may die, or fail,
and then Topsy be hustled off to auction, spite of all I can do."

"Really, you are quite provident. Well, seeing I'm in the hands of a
Yankee, there is nothing for it but to concede;" and St. Clare rapidly
wrote off a deed of gift, which, as he was well versed in the forms
of law, he could easily do, and signed his name to it in sprawling
capitals, concluding by a tremendous flourish.

"There, isn't that black and white, now, Miss Vermont?" he said, as he
handed it to her.

"Good boy," said Miss Ophelia, smiling. "But must it not be witnessed?"

"O, bother!--yes. Here," he said, opening the door into Marie's
apartment, "Marie, Cousin wants your autograph; just put your name down
here."

"What's this?" said Marie, as she ran over the paper. "Ridiculous! I
thought Cousin was too pious for such horrid things," she added, as she
carelessly wrote her name; "but, if she has a fancy for that article, I
am sure she's welcome."

"There, now, she's yours, body and soul," said St. Clare, handing the
paper.

"No more mine now than she was before," Miss Ophelia. "Nobody but God
has a right to give her to me; but I can protect her now."

"Well, she's yours by a fiction of law, then," said St. Clare, as he
turned back into the parlor, and sat down to his paper.

Miss Ophelia, who seldom sat much in Marie's company, followed him into
the parlor, having first carefully laid away the paper.

"Augustine," she said, suddenly, as she sat knitting, "have you ever
made any provision for your servants, in case of your death?"

"No," said St. Clare, as he read on.

"Then all your indulgence to them may prove a great cruelty, by and by."

St. Clare had often thought the same thing himself; but he answered,
negligently.

"Well, I mean to make a provision, by and by."

"When?" said Miss Ophelia.

"O, one of these days."

"What if you should die first?"

"Cousin, what's the matter?" said St. Clare, laying down his paper
and looking at her. "Do you think I show symptoms of yellow fever or
cholera, that you are making post mortem arrangements with such zeal?"

"'In the midst of life we are in death,'" said Miss Ophelia.

St. Clare rose up, and laying the paper down, carelessly, walked to the
door that stood open on the verandah, to put an end to a conversation
that was not agreeable to him. Mechanically, he repeated the last word
again,--_"Death!"_--and, as he leaned against the railings, and watched
the sparkling water as it rose and fell in the fountain; and, as in a
dim and dizzy haze, saw flowers and trees and vases of the courts, he
repeated, again the mystic word so common in every mouth, yet of such
fearful power,--"DEATH!" "Strange that there should be such a word,"
he said, "and such a thing, and we ever forget it; that one should be
living, warm and beautiful, full of hopes, desires and wants, one day,
and the next be gone, utterly gone, and forever!"

It was a warm, golden evening; and, as he walked to the other end of the
verandah, he saw Tom busily intent on his Bible, pointing, as he did so,
with his finger to each successive word, and whispering them to himself
with an earnest air.

"Want me to read to you, Tom?" said St. Clare, seating himself
carelessly by him.

"If Mas'r pleases," said Tom, gratefully, "Mas'r makes it so much
plainer."

