woman! I never saw above a dozen women that wouldn't half kill a horse,
or a servant, either, if they had their own way with them!--let alone a
man."

"There is no use in this shilly-shally way of yours, St. Clare!" said
Marie. "Cousin is a woman of sense, and she sees it now, as plain as I
do."

Miss Ophelia had just the capability of indignation that belongs to the
thorough-paced housekeeper, and this had been pretty actively roused
by the artifice and wastefulness of the child; in fact, many of my
lady readers must own that they should have felt just so in her
circumstances; but Marie's words went beyond her, and she felt less
heat.

"I wouldn't have the child treated so, for the world," she said; "but,
I am sure, Augustine, I don't know what to do. I've taught and taught;
I've talked till I'm tired; I've whipped her; I've punished her in every
way I can think of, and she's just what she was at first."

"Come here, Tops, you monkey!" said St. Clare, calling the child up to
him.

Topsy came up; her round, hard eyes glittering and blinking with a
mixture of apprehensiveness and their usual odd drollery.

"What makes you behave so?" said St. Clare, who could not help being
amused with the child's expression.

"Spects it's my wicked heart," said Topsy, demurely; "Miss Feely says
so."

"Don't you see how much Miss Ophelia has done for you? She says she has
done everything she can think of."

"Lor, yes, Mas'r! old Missis used to say so, too. She whipped me a heap
harder, and used to pull my har, and knock my head agin the door; but
it didn't do me no good! I spects, if they 's to pull every spire o' har
out o' my head, it wouldn't do no good, neither,--I 's so wicked! Laws!
I 's nothin but a nigger, no ways!"

"Well, I shall have to give her up," said Miss Ophelia; "I can't have
that trouble any longer."

"Well, I'd just like to ask one question," said St. Clare.

"What is it?"

"Why, if your Gospel is not strong enough to save one heathen child,
that you can have at home here, all to yourself, what's the use of
sending one or two poor missionaries off with it among thousands of just
such? I suppose this child is about a fair sample of what thousands of
your heathen are."

Miss Ophelia did not make an immediate answer; and Eva, who had stood a
silent spectator of the scene thus far, made a silent sign to Topsy to
follow her. There was a little glass-room at the corner of the verandah,
which St. Clare used as a sort of reading-room; and Eva and Topsy
disappeared into this place.

"What's Eva going about, now?" said St. Clare; "I mean to see."

And, advancing on tiptoe, he lifted up a curtain that covered the
glass-door, and looked in. In a moment, laying his finger on his lips,
he made a silent gesture to Miss Ophelia to come and look. There sat the
two children on the floor, with their side faces towards them. Topsy,
with her usual air of careless drollery and unconcern; but, opposite to
her, Eva, her whole face fervent with feeling, and tears in her large
eyes.

"What does make you so bad, Topsy? Why won't you try and be good? Don't
you love _anybody_, Topsy?"

"Donno nothing 'bout love; I loves candy and sich, that's all," said
Topsy.

"But you love your father and mother?"

"Never had none, ye know. I telled ye that, Miss Eva."

"O, I know," said Eva, sadly; "but hadn't you any brother, or sister, or
aunt, or--"

"No, none on 'em,--never had nothing nor nobody."

"But, Topsy, if you'd only try to be good, you might--"

"Couldn't never be nothin' but a nigger, if I was ever so good," said
Topsy. "If I could be skinned, and come white, I'd try then."

"But people can love you, if you are black, Topsy. Miss Ophelia would
love you, if you were good."

Topsy gave the short, blunt laugh that was her common mode of expressing
incredulity.

"Don't you think so?" said Eva.

"No; she can't bar me, 'cause I'm a nigger!--she'd 's soon have a
toad touch her! There can't nobody love niggers, and niggers can't do
nothin'! _I_ don't care," said Topsy, beginning to whistle.

"O, Topsy, poor child, _I_ love you!" said Eva, with a sudden burst of
feeling, and laying her little thin, white hand on Topsy's shoulder;
"I love you, because you haven't had any father, or mother, or
friends;--because you've been a poor, abused child! I love you, and I
want you to be good. I am very unwell, Topsy, and I think I shan't live
a great while; and it really grieves me, to have you be so naughty. I
wish you would try to be good, for my sake;--it's only a little while I
shall be with you."

The round, keen eyes of the black child were overcast with
tears;--large, bright drops rolled heavily down, one by one, and fell on
the little white hand. Yes, in that moment, a ray of real belief, a ray
of heavenly love, had penetrated the darkness of her heathen soul! She
laid her head down between her knees, and wept and sobbed,--while the
beautiful child, bending over her, looked like the picture of some
bright angel stooping to reclaim a sinner.

"Poor Topsy!" said Eva, "don't you know that Jesus loves all alike? He
is just as willing to love you, as me. He loves you just as I do,--only
more, because he is better. He will help you to be good; and you can go
to Heaven at last, and be an angel forever, just as much as if you
were white. Only think of it, Topsy!--_you_ can be one of those spirits
bright, Uncle Tom sings about."

"O, dear Miss Eva, dear Miss Eva!" said the child; "I will try, I will
try; I never did care nothin' about it before."

St. Clare, at this instant, dropped the curtain. "It puts me in mind of
mother," he said to Miss Ophelia. "It is true what she told me; if we
want to give sight to the blind, we must be willing to do as Christ
did,--call them to us, and _put our hands on them_."

"I've always had a prejudice against negroes," said Miss Ophelia, "and
it's a fact, I never could bear to have that child touch me; but, I
don't think she knew it."

"Trust any child to find that out," said St. Clare; "there's no keeping
it from them. But I believe that all the trying in the world to benefit
a child, and all the substantial favors you can do them, will never
excite one emotion of gratitude, while that feeling of repugnance
remains in the heart;--it's a queer kind of a fact,--but so it is."

"I don't know how I can help it," said Miss Ophelia; "they _are_
disagreeable to me,--this child in particular,--how can I help feeling
so?"

"Eva does, it seems."

"Well, she's so loving! After all, though, she's no more than
Christ-like," said Miss Ophelia; "I wish I were like her. She might
teach me a lesson."

"It wouldn't be the first time a little child had been used to instruct
an old disciple, if it _were_ so," said St. Clare.




Death

     Weep not for those whom the veil of the tomb,
     In life's early morning, hath hid from our eyes.*


     * "Weep Not for Those," a poem by Thomas Moore (1779-1852).

Eva's bed-room was a spacious apartment, which, like all the other
rooms in the house, opened on to the broad verandah. The room
communicated, on one side, with her father and mother's apartment;
on the other, with that appropriated to Miss Ophelia. St. Clare had
gratified his own eye and taste, in furnishing this room in a style
that had a peculiar keeping with the character of her for whom it was
intended. The windows were hung with curtains of rose-colored and white
muslin, the floor was spread with a matting which had been ordered
in Paris, to a pattern of his own device, having round it a border of
rose-buds and leaves, and a centre-piece with full-flown roses. The
bedstead, chairs, and lounges, were of bamboo, wrought in peculiarly
graceful and fanciful patterns. Over the head of the bed was an
alabaster bracket, on which a beautiful sculptured angel stood,
with drooping wings, holding out a crown of myrtle-leaves. From this
depended, over the bed, light curtains of rose-colored gauze, striped
with silver, supplying that protection from mosquitos which is an
indispensable addition to all sleeping accommodation in that climate.
The graceful bamboo lounges were amply supplied with cushions of
rose-colored damask, while over them, depending from the hands of
sculptured figures, were gauze curtains similar to those of the bed. A
light, fanciful bamboo table stood in the middle of the room, where a
Parian vase, wrought in the shape of a white lily, with its buds, stood,
ever filled with flowers. On this table lay Eva's books and little
trinkets, with an elegantly wrought alabaster writing-stand, which her
father had supplied to her when he saw her trying to improve herself
in writing. There was a fireplace in the room, and on the marble mantle
above stood a beautifully wrought statuette of Jesus receiving little
children, and on either side marble vases, for which it was Tom's pride
and delight to offer bouquets every morning. Two or three exquisite
paintings of children, in various attitudes, embellished the wall. In
short, the eye could turn nowhere without meeting images of childhood,
of beauty, and of peace. Those little eyes never opened, in the morning
light, without falling on something which suggested to the heart
soothing and beautiful thoughts.

The deceitful strength which had buoyed Eva up for a little while was
fast passing away; seldom and more seldom her light footstep was heard
in the verandah, and oftener and oftener she was found reclined on a
little lounge by the open window, her large, deep eyes fixed on the
rising and falling waters of the lake.

It was towards the middle of the afternoon, as she was so
reclining,--her Bible half open, her little transparent fingers lying
listlessly between the leaves,--suddenly she heard her mother's voice,
in sharp tones, in the verandah.

"What now, you baggage!--what new piece of mischief! You've been picking
the flowers, hey?" and Eva heard the sound of a smart slap.

"Law, Missis! they 's for Miss Eva," she heard a voice say, which she
knew belonged to Topsy.

"Miss Eva! A pretty excuse!--you suppose she wants _your_ flowers, you
good-for-nothing nigger! Get along off with you!"

In a moment, Eva was off from her lounge, and in the verandah.

"O, don't, mother! I should like the flowers; do give them to me; I want
them!"

"Why, Eva, your room is full now."

"I can't have too many," said Eva. "Topsy, do bring them here."

Topsy, who had stood sullenly, holding down her head, now came up
and offered her flowers. She did it with a look of hesitation and
bashfulness, quite unlike the eldrich boldness and brightness which was
usual with her.

"It's a beautiful bouquet!" said Eva, looking at it.

It was rather a singular one,--a brilliant scarlet geranium, and one
single white japonica, with its glossy leaves. It was tied up with an
evident eye to the contrast of color, and the arrangement of every leaf
had carefully been studied.

Topsy looked pleased, as Eva said,--"Topsy, you arrange flowers very
prettily. Here," she said, "is this vase I haven't any flowers for. I
wish you'd arrange something every day for it."

"Well, that's odd!" said Marie. "What in the world do you want that
for?"

"Never mind, mamma; you'd as lief as not Topsy should do it,--had you
not?"

"Of course, anything you please, dear! Topsy, you hear your young
mistress;--see that you mind."

Topsy made a short courtesy, and looked down; and, as she turned away,
Eva saw a tear roll down her dark cheek.

"You see, mamma, I knew poor Topsy wanted to do something for me," said
Eva to her mother.

"O, nonsense! it's only because she likes to do mischief. She knows she
mustn't pick flowers,--so she does it; that's all there is to it. But,
if you fancy to have her pluck them, so be it."

"Mamma, I think Topsy is different from what she used to be; she's
trying to be a good girl."

"She'll have to try a good while before _she_ gets to be good," said
Marie, with a careless laugh.

"Well, you know, mamma, poor Topsy! everything has always been against
her."

"Not since she's been here, I'm sure. If she hasn't been talked to, and
preached to, and every earthly thing done that anybody could do;--and
she's just so ugly, and always will be; you can't make anything of the
creature!"

"But, mamma, it's so different to be brought up as I've been, with
so many friends, so many things to make me good and happy; and to be
brought up as she's been, all the time, till she came here!"

"Most likely," said Marie, yawning,--"dear me, how hot it is!"

"Mamma, you believe, don't you, that Topsy could become an angel, as
well as any of us, if she were a Christian?"

"Topsy! what a ridiculous idea! Nobody but you would ever think of it. I
suppose she could, though."

"But, mamma, isn't God her father, as much as ours? Isn't Jesus her
Saviour?"

"Well, that may be. I suppose God made everybody," said Marie. "Where is
my smelling-bottle?"

"It's such a pity,--oh! _such_ a pity!" said Eva, looking out on the
distant lake, and speaking half to herself.

"What's a pity?" said Marie.

"Why, that any one, who could be a bright angel, and live with angels,
should go all down, down down, and nobody help them!--oh dear!"

"Well, we can't help it; it's no use worrying, Eva! I don't know what's
to be done; we ought to be thankful for our own advantages."

"I hardly can be," said Eva, "I'm so sorry to think of poor folks that
haven't any."

"That's odd enough," said Marie;--"I'm sure my religion makes me
thankful for my advantages."

"Mamma," said Eva, "I want to have some of my hair cut off,--a good deal
of it."

"What for?" said Marie.

"Mamma, I want to give some away to my friends, while I am able to give
it to them myself. Won't you ask aunty to come and cut it for me?"

Marie raised her voice, and called Miss Ophelia, from the other room.

The child half rose from her pillow as she came in, and, shaking down
her long golden-brown curls, said, rather playfully, "Come aunty, shear
the sheep!"

"What's that?" said St. Clare, who just then entered with some fruit he
had been out to get for her.

"Papa, I just want aunty to cut off some of my hair;--there's too much
of it, and it makes my head hot. Besides, I want to give some of it
away."

Miss Ophelia came, with her scissors.

"Take care,--don't spoil the looks of it!" said her father; "cut
underneath, where it won't show. Eva's curls are my pride."

"O, papa!" said Eva, sadly.

"Yes, and I want them kept handsome against the time I take you up to
your uncle's plantation, to see Cousin Henrique," said St. Clare, in a
gay tone.

"I shall never go there, papa;--I am going to a better country. O, do
believe me! Don't you see, papa, that I get weaker, every day?"

"Why do you insist that I shall believe such a cruel thing, Eva?" said
her father.

"Only because it is _true_, papa: and, if you will believe it now,
perhaps you will get to feel about it as I do."

St. Clare closed his lips, and stood gloomily eying the long, beautiful
curls, which, as they were separated from the child's head, were laid,
one by one, in her lap. She raised them up, looked earnestly at them,
twined them around her thin fingers, and looked from time to time,
anxiously at her father.

"It's just what I've been foreboding!" said Marie; "it's just what has
been preying on my health, from day to day, bringing me downward to the
grave, though nobody regards it. I have seen this, long. St. Clare, you
will see, after a while, that I was right."

"Which will afford you great consolation, no doubt!" said St. Clare, in
a dry, bitter tone.

Marie lay back on a lounge, and covered her face with her cambric
handkerchief.

Eva's clear blue eye looked earnestly from one to the other. It was the
calm, comprehending gaze of a soul half loosed from its earthly bonds;
it was evident she saw, felt, and appreciated, the difference between
the two.

She beckoned with her hand to her father. He came and sat down by her.

"Papa, my strength fades away every day, and I know I must go. There are
some things I want to say and do,--that I ought to do; and you are so
unwilling to have me speak a word on this subject. But it must come;
there's no putting it off. Do be willing I should speak now!"

"My child, I _am_ willing!" said St. Clare, covering his eyes with one
hand, and holding up Eva's hand with the other.

"Then, I want to see all our people together. I have some things I
_must_ say to them," said Eva.

"_Well_," said St. Clare, in a tone of dry endurance.

Miss Ophelia despatched a messenger, and soon the whole of the servants
were convened in the room.

Eva lay back on her pillows; her hair hanging loosely about her face,
her crimson cheeks contrasting painfully with the intense whiteness of
her complexion and the thin contour of her limbs and features, and her
large, soul-like eyes fixed earnestly on every one.

The servants were struck with a sudden emotion. The spiritual face, the
long locks of hair cut off and lying by her, her father's averted face,
and Marie's sobs, struck at once upon the feelings of a sensitive and
impressible race; and, as they came in, they looked one on another,
sighed, and shook their heads. There was a deep silence, like that of a
funeral.

Eva raised herself, and looked long and earnestly round at every one.
All looked sad and apprehensive. Many of the women hid their faces in
their aprons.

"I sent for you all, my dear friends," said Eva, "because I love you.
I love you all; and I have something to say to you, which I want you
always to remember. . . . I am going to leave you. In a few more weeks
you will see me no more--"

Here the child was interrupted by bursts of groans, sobs, and
lamentations, which broke from all present, and in which her slender
voice was lost entirely. She waited a moment, and then, speaking in a
tone that checked the sobs of all, she said,

"If you love me, you must not interrupt me so. Listen to what I say. I
want to speak to you about your souls. . . . Many of you, I am afraid,
are very careless. You are thinking only about this world. I want you
to remember that there is a beautiful world, where Jesus is. I am going
there, and you can go there. It is for you, as much as me. But, if you
want to go there, you must not live idle, careless, thoughtless lives.
You must be Christians. You must remember that each one of you
can become angels, and be angels forever. . . . If you want to be
Christians, Jesus will help you. You must pray to him; you must read--"

The child checked herself, looked piteously at them, and said,
sorrowfully,

"O dear! you _can't_ read--poor souls!" and she hid her face in the
pillow and sobbed, while many a smothered sob from those she was
addressing, who were kneeling on the floor, aroused her.

"Never mind," she said, raising her face and smiling brightly through
her tears, "I have prayed for you; and I know Jesus will help you, even
if you can't read. Try all to do the best you can; pray every day; ask
Him to help you, and get the Bible read to you whenever you can; and I
think I shall see you all in heaven."

"Amen," was the murmured response from the lips of Tom and Mammy,
and some of the elder ones, who belonged to the Methodist church. The
younger and more thoughtless ones, for the time completely overcome,
were sobbing, with their heads bowed upon their knees.

"I know," said Eva, "you all love me."

"Yes; oh, yes! indeed we do! Lord bless her!" was the involuntary answer
of all.

"Yes, I know you do! There isn't one of you that hasn't always been very
kind to me; and I want to give you something that, when you look at,
you shall always remember me, I'm going to give all of you a curl of my
hair; and, when you look at it, think that I loved you and am gone to
heaven, and that I want to see you all there."

It is impossible to describe the scene, as, with tears and sobs, they
gathered round the little creature, and took from her hands what seemed
to them a last mark of her love. They fell on their knees; they sobbed,
and prayed, and kissed the hem of her garment; and the elder ones poured
forth words of endearment, mingled in prayers and blessings, after the
manner of their susceptible race.

As each one took their gift, Miss Ophelia, who was apprehensive for the
effect of all this excitement on her little patient, signed to each one
to pass out of the apartment.

At last, all were gone but Tom and Mammy.

"Here, Uncle Tom," said Eva, "is a beautiful one for you. O, I am so
happy, Uncle Tom, to think I shall see you in heaven,--for I'm sure I
shall; and Mammy,--dear, good, kind Mammy!" she said, fondly throwing
her arms round her old nurse,--"I know you'll be there, too."

"O, Miss Eva, don't see how I can live without ye, no how!" said the
faithful creature. "'Pears like it's just taking everything off the
place to oncet!" and Mammy gave way to a passion of grief.

Miss Ophelia pushed her and Tom gently from the apartment, and thought
they were all gone; but, as she turned, Topsy was standing there.

"Where did you start up from?" she said, suddenly.

"I was here," said Topsy, wiping the tears from her eyes. "O, Miss Eva,
I've been a bad girl; but won't you give _me_ one, too?"

"Yes, poor Topsy! to be sure, I will. There--every time you look at
that, think that I love you, and wanted you to be a good girl!"

"O, Miss Eva, I _is_ tryin!" said Topsy, earnestly; "but, Lor, it's so
hard to be good! 'Pears like I an't used to it, no ways!"

"Jesus knows it, Topsy; he is sorry for you; he will help you."

