Topsy, with her eyes hid in her apron, was silently passed from the
apartment by Miss Ophelia; but, as she went, she hid the precious curl
in her bosom.

All being gone, Miss Ophelia shut the door. That worthy lady had wiped
away many tears of her own, during the scene; but concern for the
consequence of such an excitement to her young charge was uppermost in
her mind.

St. Clare had been sitting, during the whole time, with his hand shading
his eyes, in the same attitude.

When they were all gone, he sat so still.

"Papa!" said Eva, gently, laying her hand on his.

He gave a sudden start and shiver; but made no answer.

"Dear papa!" said Eva.

"_I cannot_," said St. Clare, rising, "I _cannot_ have it so! The
Almighty hath dealt _very bitterly_ with me!" and St. Clare pronounced
these words with a bitter emphasis, indeed.

"Augustine! has not God a right to do what he will with his own?" said
Miss Ophelia.

"Perhaps so; but that doesn't make it any easier to bear," said he, with
a dry, hard, tearless manner, as he turned away.

"Papa, you break my heart!" said Eva, rising and throwing herself into
his arms; "you must not feel so!" and the child sobbed and wept with
a violence which alarmed them all, and turned her father's thoughts at
once to another channel.

"There, Eva,--there, dearest! Hush! hush! I was wrong; I was wicked. I
will feel any way, do any way,--only don't distress yourself; don't sob
so. I will be resigned; I was wicked to speak as I did."

Eva soon lay like a wearied dove in her father's arms; and he, bending
over her, soothed her by every tender word he could think of.

Marie rose and threw herself out of the apartment into her own, when she
fell into violent hysterics.

"You didn't give me a curl, Eva," said her father, smiling sadly.

"They are all yours, papa," said she, smiling--"yours and mamma's; and
you must give dear aunty as many as she wants. I only gave them to our
poor people myself, because you know, papa, they might be forgotten when
I am gone, and because I hoped it might help them remember. . . . You
are a Christian, are you not, papa?" said Eva, doubtfully.

"Why do you ask me?"

"I don't know. You are so good, I don't see how you can help it."

"What is being a Christian, Eva?"

"Loving Christ most of all," said Eva.

"Do you, Eva?"

"Certainly I do."

"You never saw him," said St. Clare.

"That makes no difference," said Eva. "I believe him, and in a few days
I shall _see_ him;" and the young face grew fervent, radiant with joy.

St. Clare said no more. It was a feeling which he had seen before in his
mother; but no chord within vibrated to it.

Eva, after this, declined rapidly; there was no more any doubt of the
event; the fondest hope could not be blinded. Her beautiful room was
avowedly a sick room; and Miss Ophelia day and night performed the
duties of a nurse,--and never did her friends appreciate her value more
than in that capacity. With so well-trained a hand and eye, such perfect
adroitness and practice in every art which could promote neatness
and comfort, and keep out of sight every disagreeable incident of
sickness,--with such a perfect sense of time, such a clear, untroubled
head, such exact accuracy in remembering every prescription and
direction of the doctors,--she was everything to him. They who had
shrugged their shoulders at her little peculiarities and setnesses, so
unlike the careless freedom of southern manners, acknowledged that now
she was the exact person that was wanted.

Uncle Tom was much in Eva's room. The child suffered much from nervous
restlessness, and it was a relief to her to be carried; and it was Tom's
greatest delight to carry her little frail form in his arms, resting on
a pillow, now up and down her room, now out into the verandah; and when
the fresh sea-breezes blew from the lake,--and the child felt freshest
in the morning,--he would sometimes walk with her under the orange-trees
in the garden, or, sitting down in some of their old seats, sing to her
their favorite old hymns.

Her father often did the same thing; but his frame was slighter, and
when he was weary, Eva would say to him,

"O, papa, let Tom take me. Poor fellow! it pleases him; and you know
it's all he can do now, and he wants to do something!"

"So do I, Eva!" said her father.

"Well, papa, you can do everything, and are everything to me. You read
to me,--you sit up nights,--and Tom has only this one thing, and his
singing; and I know, too, he does it easier than you can. He carries me
so strong!"

The desire to do something was not confined to Tom. Every servant in the
establishment showed the same feeling, and in their way did what they
could.

Poor Mammy's heart yearned towards her darling; but she found no
opportunity, night or day, as Marie declared that the state of her mind
was such, it was impossible for her to rest; and, of course, it was
against her principles to let any one else rest. Twenty times in a
night, Mammy would be roused to rub her feet, to bathe her head, to find
her pocket-handkerchief, to see what the noise was in Eva's room, to let
down a curtain because it was too light, or to put it up because it was
too dark; and, in the daytime, when she longed to have some share in the
nursing of her pet, Marie seemed unusually ingenious in keeping her busy
anywhere and everywhere all over the house, or about her own person; so
that stolen interviews and momentary glimpses were all she could obtain.

"I feel it my duty to be particularly careful of myself, now," she would
say, "feeble as I am, and with the whole care and nursing of that dear
child upon me."

"Indeed, my dear," said St. Clare, "I thought our cousin relieved you of
that."

"You talk like a man, St. Clare,--just as if a mother _could_ be
relieved of the care of a child in that state; but, then, it's all
alike,--no one ever knows what I feel! I can't throw things off, as you
do."

St. Clare smiled. You must excuse him, he couldn't help it,--for St.
Clare could smile yet. For so bright and placid was the farewell voyage
of the little spirit,--by such sweet and fragrant breezes was the small
bark borne towards the heavenly shores,--that it was impossible to
realize that it was death that was approaching. The child felt no
pain,--only a tranquil, soft weakness, daily and almost insensibly
increasing; and she was so beautiful, so loving, so trustful, so
happy, that one could not resist the soothing influence of that air of
innocence and peace which seemed to breathe around her. St. Clare found
a strange calm coming over him. It was not hope,--that was impossible;
it was not resignation; it was only a calm resting in the present, which
seemed so beautiful that he wished to think of no future. It was like
that hush of spirit which we feel amid the bright, mild woods of autumn,
when the bright hectic flush is on the trees, and the last lingering
flowers by the brook; and we joy in it all the more, because we know
that soon it will all pass away.

The friend who knew most of Eva's own imaginings and foreshadowings was
her faithful bearer, Tom. To him she said what she would not disturb her
father by saying. To him she imparted those mysterious intimations which
the soul feels, as the cords begin to unbind, ere it leaves its clay
forever.

Tom, at last, would not sleep in his room, but lay all night in the
outer verandah, ready to rouse at every call.

"Uncle Tom, what alive have you taken to sleeping anywhere and
everywhere, like a dog, for?" said Miss Ophelia. "I thought you was one
of the orderly sort, that liked to lie in bed in a Christian way."

"I do, Miss Feely," said Tom, mysteriously. "I do, but now--"

"Well, what now?"

"We mustn't speak loud; Mas'r St. Clare won't hear on 't; but Miss
Feely, you know there must be somebody watchin' for the bridegroom."

"What do you mean, Tom?"

"You know it says in Scripture, 'At midnight there was a great cry
made. Behold, the bridegroom cometh.' That's what I'm spectin now, every
night, Miss Feely,--and I couldn't sleep out o' hearin, no ways."

"Why, Uncle Tom, what makes you think so?"

"Miss Eva, she talks to me. The Lord, he sends his messenger in the
soul. I must be thar, Miss Feely; for when that ar blessed child goes
into the kingdom, they'll open the door so wide, we'll all get a look in
at the glory, Miss Feely."

"Uncle Tom, did Miss Eva say she felt more unwell than usual tonight?"

"No; but she telled me, this morning, she was coming nearer,--thar's
them that tells it to the child, Miss Feely. It's the angels,--'it's
the trumpet sound afore the break o' day,'" said Tom, quoting from a
favorite hymn.

This dialogue passed between Miss Ophelia and Tom, between ten and
eleven, one evening, after her arrangements had all been made for the
night, when, on going to bolt her outer door, she found Tom stretched
along by it, in the outer verandah.

She was not nervous or impressible; but the solemn, heart-felt manner
struck her. Eva had been unusually bright and cheerful, that afternoon,
and had sat raised in her bed, and looked over all her little trinkets
and precious things, and designated the friends to whom she would
have them given; and her manner was more animated, and her voice more
natural, than they had known it for weeks. Her father had been in, in
the evening, and had said that Eva appeared more like her former self
than ever she had done since her sickness; and when he kissed her for
the night, he said to Miss Ophelia,--"Cousin, we may keep her with us,
after all; she is certainly better;" and he had retired with a lighter
heart in his bosom than he had had there for weeks.

But at midnight,--strange, mystic hour!--when the veil between the frail
present and the eternal future grows thin,--then came the messenger!

There was a sound in that chamber, first of one who stepped quickly. It
was Miss Ophelia, who had resolved to sit up all night with her
little charge, and who, at the turn of the night, had discerned what
experienced nurses significantly call "a change." The outer door was
quickly opened, and Tom, who was watching outside, was on the alert, in
a moment.

"Go for the doctor, Tom! lose not a moment," said Miss Ophelia; and,
stepping across the room, she rapped at St. Clare's door.

"Cousin," she said, "I wish you would come."

Those words fell on his heart like clods upon a coffin. Why did they?
He was up and in the room in an instant, and bending over Eva, who still
slept.

What was it he saw that made his heart stand still? Why was no word
spoken between the two? Thou canst say, who hast seen that same
expression on the face dearest to thee;--that look indescribable,
hopeless, unmistakable, that says to thee that thy beloved is no longer
thine.

On the face of the child, however, there was no ghastly imprint,--only
a high and almost sublime expression,--the overshadowing presence of
spiritual natures, the dawning of immortal life in that childish soul.

They stood there so still, gazing upon her, that even the ticking of the
watch seemed too loud. In a few moments, Tom returned, with the doctor.
He entered, gave one look, and stood silent as the rest.

"When did this change take place?" said he, in a low whisper, to Miss
Ophelia.

"About the turn of the night," was the reply.

Marie, roused by the entrance of the doctor, appeared, hurriedly, from
the next room.

"Augustine! Cousin!--O!--what!" she hurriedly began.

"Hush!" said St. Clare, hoarsely; _"she is dying!"_

Mammy heard the words, and flew to awaken the servants. The house was
soon roused,--lights were seen, footsteps heard, anxious faces thronged
the verandah, and looked tearfully through the glass doors; but St.
Clare heard and said nothing,--he saw only _that look_ on the face of
the little sleeper.

"O, if she would only wake, and speak once more!" he said; and, stooping
over her, he spoke in her ear,--"Eva, darling!"

The large blue eyes unclosed--a smile passed over her face;--she tried
to raise her head, and to speak.

"Do you know me, Eva?"

"Dear papa," said the child, with a last effort, throwing her arms about
his neck. In a moment they dropped again; and, as St. Clare raised his
head, he saw a spasm of mortal agony pass over the face,--she struggled
for breath, and threw up her little hands.

"O, God, this is dreadful!" he said, turning away in agony, and wringing
Tom's hand, scarce conscious what he was doing. "O, Tom, my boy, it is
killing me!"

Tom had his master's hands between his own; and, with tears streaming
down his dark cheeks, looked up for help where he had always been used
to look.

"Pray that this may be cut short!" said St. Clare,--"this wrings my
heart."

"O, bless the Lord! it's over,--it's over, dear Master!" said Tom; "look
at her."

The child lay panting on her pillows, as one exhausted,--the large clear
eyes rolled up and fixed. Ah, what said those eyes, that spoke so
much of heaven! Earth was past,--and earthly pain; but so solemn, so
mysterious, was the triumphant brightness of that face, that it
checked even the sobs of sorrow. They pressed around her, in breathless
stillness.

"Eva," said St. Clare, gently.

She did not hear.

"O, Eva, tell us what you see! What is it?" said her father.

A bright, a glorious smile passed over her face, and she said,
brokenly,--"O! love,--joy,--peace!" gave one sigh and passed from death
unto life!

"Farewell, beloved child! the bright, eternal doors have closed after
thee; we shall see thy sweet face no more. O, woe for them who watched
thy entrance into heaven, when they shall wake and find only the cold
gray sky of daily life, and thou gone forever!"




"This Is the Last of Earth"*

     *  "This is the last of Earth!  I am content," last words of
     John Quincy Adams, uttered February 21, 1848.

The statuettes and pictures in Eva's room were shrouded in white
napkins, and only hushed breathings and muffled footfalls were heard
there, and the light stole in solemnly through windows partially
darkened by closed blinds.

The bed was draped in white; and there, beneath the drooping
angel-figure, lay a little sleeping form,--sleeping never to waken!

There she lay, robed in one of the simple white dresses she had been
wont to wear when living; the rose-colored light through the curtains
cast over the icy coldness of death a warm glow. The heavy eyelashes
drooped softly on the pure cheek; the head was turned a little to
one side, as if in natural sleep, but there was diffused over every
lineament of the face that high celestial expression, that mingling of
rapture and repose, which showed it was no earthly or temporary sleep,
but the long, sacred rest which "He giveth to his beloved."

There is no death to such as thou, dear Eva! neither darkness nor shadow
of death; only such a bright fading as when the morning star fades in
the golden dawn. Thine is the victory without the battle,--the crown
without the conflict.

So did St. Clare think, as, with folded arms, he stood there gazing.
Ah! who shall say what he did think? for, from the hour that voices
had said, in the dying chamber, "she is gone," it had been all a dreary
mist, a heavy "dimness of anguish." He had heard voices around him; he
had had questions asked, and answered them; they had asked him when
he would have the funeral, and where they should lay her; and he had
answered, impatiently, that he cared not.

Adolph and Rosa had arranged the chamber; volatile, fickle and childish,
as they generally were, they were soft-hearted and full of feeling;
and, while Miss Ophelia presided over the general details of order and
neatness, it was their hands that added those soft, poetic touches to
the arrangements, that took from the death-room the grim and ghastly air
which too often marks a New England funeral.

There were still flowers on the shelves,--all white, delicate and
fragrant, with graceful, drooping leaves. Eva's little table, covered
with white, bore on it her favorite vase, with a single white moss
rose-bud in it. The folds of the drapery, the fall of the curtains, had
been arranged and rearranged, by Adolph and Rosa, with that nicety of
eye which characterizes their race. Even now, while St. Clare stood
there thinking, little Rosa tripped softly into the chamber with a
basket of white flowers. She stepped back when she saw St. Clare, and
stopped respectfully; but, seeing that he did not observe her, she came
forward to place them around the dead. St. Clare saw her as in a dream,
while she placed in the small hands a fair cape jessamine, and, with
admirable taste, disposed other flowers around the couch.

The door opened again, and Topsy, her eyes swelled with crying,
appeared, holding something under her apron. Rosa made a quick
forbidding gesture; but she took a step into the room.

"You must go out," said Rosa, in a sharp, positive whisper; "_you_
haven't any business here!"

"O, do let me! I brought a flower,--such a pretty one!" said Topsy,
holding up a half-blown tea rose-bud. "Do let me put just one there."

"Get along!" said Rosa, more decidedly.

"Let her stay!" said St. Clare, suddenly stamping his foot. "She shall
come."

Rosa suddenly retreated, and Topsy came forward and laid her offering at
the feet of the corpse; then suddenly, with a wild and bitter cry,
she threw herself on the floor alongside the bed, and wept, and moaned
aloud.

Miss Ophelia hastened into the room, and tried to raise and silence her;
but in vain.

"O, Miss Eva! oh, Miss Eva! I wish I 's dead, too,--I do!"

There was a piercing wildness in the cry; the blood flushed into St.
Clare's white, marble-like face, and the first tears he had shed since
Eva died stood in his eyes.

"Get up, child," said Miss Ophelia, in a softened voice; "don't cry so.
Miss Eva is gone to heaven; she is an angel."

"But I can't see her!" said Topsy. "I never shall see her!" and she
sobbed again.

They all stood a moment in silence.

"_She_ said she _loved_ me," said Topsy,--"she did! O, dear! oh, dear!
there an't _nobody_ left now,--there an't!"

"That's true enough" said St. Clare; "but do," he said to Miss Ophelia,
"see if you can't comfort the poor creature."

"I jist wish I hadn't never been born," said Topsy. "I didn't want to be
born, no ways; and I don't see no use on 't."

Miss Ophelia raised her gently, but firmly, and took her from the room;
but, as she did so, some tears fell from her eyes.

"Topsy, you poor child," she said, as she led her into her room, "don't
give up! _I_ can love you, though I am not like that dear little child.
I hope I've learnt something of the love of Christ from her. I can love
you; I do, and I'll try to help you to grow up a good Christian girl."

Miss Ophelia's voice was more than her words, and more than that were
the honest tears that fell down her face. From that hour, she acquired
an influence over the mind of the destitute child that she never lost.

"O, my Eva, whose little hour on earth did so much of good," thought St.
Clare, "what account have I to give for my long years?"

There were, for a while, soft whisperings and footfalls in the chamber,
as one after another stole in, to look at the dead; and then came the
little coffin; and then there was a funeral, and carriages drove to the
door, and strangers came and were seated; and there were white scarfs
and ribbons, and crape bands, and mourners dressed in black crape; and
there were words read from the Bible, and prayers offered; and St. Clare
lived, and walked, and moved, as one who has shed every tear;--to the
last he saw only one thing, that golden head in the coffin; but then
he saw the cloth spread over it, the lid of the coffin closed; and he
walked, when he was put beside the others, down to a little place at the
bottom of the garden, and there, by the mossy seat where she and Tom
had talked, and sung, and read so often, was the little grave. St. Clare
stood beside it,--looked vacantly down; he saw them lower the little
coffin; he heard, dimly, the solemn words, "I am the resurrection and
the Life; he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he
live;" and, as the earth was cast in and filled up the little grave,
he could not realize that it was his Eva that they were hiding from his
sight.

Nor was it!--not Eva, but only the frail seed of that bright, immortal
form with which she shall yet come forth, in the day of the Lord Jesus!

And then all were gone, and the mourners went back to the place which
should know her no more; and Marie's room was darkened, and she lay on
the bed, sobbing and moaning in uncontrollable grief, and calling every
moment for the attentions of all her servants. Of course, they had no
time to cry,--why should they? the grief was _her_ grief, and she was
fully convinced that nobody on earth did, could, or would feel it as she
did.

"St. Clare did not shed a tear," she said; "he didn't sympathize with
her; it was perfectly wonderful to think how hard-hearted and unfeeling
he was, when he must know how she suffered."

So much are people the slave of their eye and ear, that many of the
servants really thought that Missis was the principal sufferer in the
case, especially as Marie began to have hysterical spasms, and sent for
the doctor, and at last declared herself dying; and, in the running and
scampering, and bringing up hot bottles, and heating of flannels, and
chafing, and fussing, that ensued, there was quite a diversion.

Tom, however, had a feeling at his own heart, that drew him to his
master. He followed him wherever he walked, wistfully and sadly; and
when he saw him sitting, so pale and quiet, in Eva's room, holding
before his eyes her little open Bible, though seeing no letter or word
of what was in it, there was more sorrow to Tom in that still, fixed,
tearless eye, than in all Marie's moans and lamentations.

In a few days the St. Clare family were back again in the city;
Augustine, with the restlessness of grief, longing for another scene, to
change the current of his thoughts. So they left the house and garden,
with its little grave, and came back to New Orleans; and St. Clare
walked the streets busily, and strove to fill up the chasm in his heart
with hurry and bustle, and change of place; and people who saw him in
the street, or met him at the cafe, knew of his loss only by the weed
on his hat; for there he was, smiling and talking, and reading the
newspaper, and speculating on politics, and attending to business
matters; and who could see that all this smiling outside was but a
hollowed shell over a heart that was a dark and silent sepulchre?

"Mr. St. Clare is a singular man," said Marie to Miss Ophelia, in a
complaining tone. "I used to think, if there was anything in the world
he did love, it was our dear little Eva; but he seems to be forgetting
her very easily. I cannot ever get him to talk about her. I really did
think he would show more feeling!"

"Still waters run deepest, they used to tell me," said Miss Ophelia,
oracularly.

"O, I don't believe in such things; it's all talk. If people have
