
While this conversation was passing in the chamber, Legree, overcome
with his carouse, had sunk to sleep in the room below. Legree was not an
habitual drunkard. His coarse, strong nature craved, and could endure,
a continual stimulation, that would have utterly wrecked and crazed a
finer one. But a deep, underlying spirit of cautiousness prevented his
often yielding to appetite in such measure as to lose control of himself.

This night, however, in his feverish efforts to banish from his mind
those fearful elements of woe and remorse which woke within him, he had
indulged more than common; so that, when he had discharged his sable
attendants, he fell heavily on a settle in the room, and was sound
asleep.

O! how dares the bad soul to enter the shadowy world of sleep?--that
land whose dim outlines lie so fearfully near to the mystic scene of
retribution! Legree dreamed. In his heavy and feverish sleep, a veiled
form stood beside him, and laid a cold, soft hand upon him. He thought
he knew who it was; and shuddered, with creeping horror, though the
face was veiled. Then he thought he felt _that hair_ twining round his
fingers; and then, that it slid smoothly round his neck, and tightened
and tightened, and he could not draw his breath; and then he thought
voices _whispered_ to him,--whispers that chilled him with horror. Then
it seemed to him he was on the edge of a frightful abyss, holding on
and struggling in mortal fear, while dark hands stretched up, and were
pulling him over; and Cassy came behind him laughing, and pushed him.
And then rose up that solemn veiled figure, and drew aside the veil. It
was his mother; and she turned away from him, and he fell down, down,
down, amid a confused noise of shrieks, and groans, and shouts of demon
laughter,--and Legree awoke.

Calmly the rosy hue of dawn was stealing into the room. The morning star
stood, with its solemn, holy eye of light, looking down on the man
of sin, from out the brightening sky. O, with what freshness, what
solemnity and beauty, is each new day born; as if to say to insensate
man, "Behold! thou hast one more chance! _Strive_ for immortal glory!"
There is no speech nor language where this voice is not heard; but the
bold, bad man heard it not. He woke with an oath and a curse. What to
him was the gold and purple, the daily miracle of morning! What to him
the sanctity of the star which the Son of God has hallowed as his own
emblem? Brute-like, he saw without perceiving; and, stumbling forward,
poured out a tumbler of brandy, and drank half of it.

"I've had a h--l of a night!" he said to Cassy, who just then entered
from an opposite door.

"You'll get plenty of the same sort, by and by," said she, dryly.

"What do you mean, you minx?"

"You'll find out, one of these days," returned Cassy, in the same tone.
"Now Simon, I've one piece of advice to give you."

"The devil, you have!"

"My advice is," said Cassy, steadily, as she began adjusting some things
about the room, "that you let Tom alone."

"What business is 't of yours?"

"What? To be sure, I don't know what it should be. If you want to pay
twelve hundred for a fellow, and use him right up in the press of the
season, just to serve your own spite, it's no business of mine, I've
done what I could for him."

"You have? What business have you meddling in my matters?"

"None, to be sure. I've saved you some thousands of dollars, at
different times, by taking care of your hands,--that's all the thanks
I get. If your crop comes shorter into market than any of theirs, you
won't lose your bet, I suppose? Tompkins won't lord it over you, I
suppose,--and you'll pay down your money like a lady, won't you? I think
I see you doing it!"

Legree, like many other planters, had but one form of ambition,--to have
in the heaviest crop of the season,--and he had several bets on this
very present season pending in the next town. Cassy, therefore, with
woman's tact, touched the only string that could be made to vibrate.

"Well, I'll let him off at what he's got," said Legree; "but he shall
beg my pardon, and promise better fashions."

"That he won't do," said Cassy.

"Won't,--eh?"

"No, he won't," said Cassy.

"I'd like to know _why_, Mistress," said Legree, in the extreme of
scorn.

"Because he's done right, and he knows it, and won't say he's done
wrong."

"Who a cuss cares what he knows? The nigger shall say what I please,
or--"

"Or, you'll lose your bet on the cotton crop, by keeping him out of the
field, just at this very press."

"But he _will_ give up,--course, he will; don't I know what niggers is?
He'll beg like a dog, this morning."

"He won't, Simon; you don't know this kind. You may kill him by
inches,--you won't get the first word of confession out of him."

"We'll see,--where is he?" said Legree, going out.

"In the waste-room of the gin-house," said Cassy.

Legree, though he talked so stoutly to Cassy, still sallied forth from
the house with a degree of misgiving which was not common with him. His
dreams of the past night, mingled with Cassy's prudential suggestions,
considerably affected his mind. He resolved that nobody should be
witness of his encounter with Tom; and determined, if he could not
subdue him by bullying, to defer his vengeance, to be wreaked in a more
convenient season.

The solemn light of dawn--the angelic glory of the morning-star--had
looked in through the rude window of the shed where Tom was lying; and,
as if descending on that star-beam, came the solemn words, "I am the
root and offspring of David, and the bright and morning star." The
mysterious warnings and intimations of Cassy, so far from discouraging
his soul, in the end had roused it as with a heavenly call. He did not
know but that the day of his death was dawning in the sky; and his heart
throbbed with solemn throes of joy and desire, as he thought that the
wondrous _all_, of which he had often pondered,--the great white throne,
with its ever radiant rainbow; the white-robed multitude, with voices as
many waters; the crowns, the palms, the harps,--might all break upon
his vision before that sun should set again. And, therefore, without
shuddering or trembling, he heard the voice of his persecutor, as he
drew near.

"Well, my boy," said Legree, with a contemptuous kick, "how do you find
yourself? Didn't I tell yer I could larn yer a thing or two? How do yer
like it--eh? How did yer whaling agree with yer, Tom? An't quite so
crank as ye was last night. Ye couldn't treat a poor sinner, now, to a
bit of sermon, could ye,--eh?"

Tom answered nothing.

"Get up, you beast!" said Legree, kicking him again.

This was a difficult matter for one so bruised and faint; and, as Tom
made efforts to do so, Legree laughed brutally.

"What makes ye so spry, this morning, Tom? Cotched cold, may be, last
night."

Tom by this time had gained his feet, and was confronting his master
with a steady, unmoved front.

"The devil, you can!" said Legree, looking him over. "I believe you
haven't got enough yet. Now, Tom, get right down on yer knees and beg my
pardon, for yer shines last night."

Tom did not move.

"Down, you dog!" said Legree, striking him with his riding-whip.

"Mas'r Legree," said Tom, "I can't do it. I did only what I thought was
right. I shall do just so again, if ever the time comes. I never will do
a cruel thing, come what may."

"Yes, but ye don't know what may come, Master Tom. Ye think what you've
got is something. I tell you 'tan't anything,--nothing 't all. How
would ye like to be tied to a tree, and have a slow fire lit up around
ye;--wouldn't that be pleasant,--eh, Tom?"

"Mas'r," said Tom, "I know ye can do dreadful things; but,"--he
stretched himself upward and clasped his hands,--"but, after ye've
killed the body, there an't no more ye can do. And O, there's all
ETERNITY to come, after that!"

ETERNITY,--the word thrilled through the black man's soul with light and
power, as he spoke; it thrilled through the sinner's soul, too, like the
bite of a scorpion. Legree gnashed on him with his teeth, but rage kept
him silent; and Tom, like a man disenthralled, spoke, in a clear and
cheerful voice,

"Mas'r Legree, as ye bought me, I'll be a true and faithful servant to
ye. I'll give ye all the work of my hands, all my time, all my strength;
but my soul I won't give up to mortal man. I will hold on to the Lord,
and put his commands before all,--die or live; you may be sure on 't.
Mas'r Legree, I ain't a grain afeard to die. I'd as soon die as not. Ye
may whip me, starve me, burn me,--it'll only send me sooner where I want
to go."

"I'll make ye give out, though, 'fore I've done!" said Legree, in a
rage.

"I shall have _help_," said Tom; "you'll never do it."

"Who the devil's going to help you?" said Legree, scornfully.

"The Lord Almighty," said Tom.

"D--n you!" said Legree, as with one blow of his fist he felled Tom to
the earth.

A cold soft hand fell on Legree's at this moment. He turned,--it was
Cassy's; but the cold soft touch recalled his dream of the night before,
and, flashing through the chambers of his brain, came all the fearful
images of the night-watches, with a portion of the horror that
accompanied them.

"Will you be a fool?" said Cassy, in French. "Let him go! Let me alone
to get him fit to be in the field again. Isn't it just as I told you?"

They say the alligator, the rhinoceros, though enclosed in bullet-proof
mail, have each a spot where they are vulnerable; and fierce, reckless,
unbelieving reprobates, have commonly this point in superstitious dread.

Legree turned away, determined to let the point go for the time.

"Well, have it your own way," he said, doggedly, to Cassy.

"Hark, ye!" he said to Tom; "I won't deal with ye now, because the
business is pressing, and I want all my hands; but I _never_ forget.
I'll score it against ye, and sometime I'll have my pay out o' yer old
black hide,--mind ye!"

Legree turned, and went out.

"There you go," said Cassy, looking darkly after him; "your reckoning's
to come, yet!--My poor fellow, how are you?"

"The Lord God hath sent his angel, and shut the lion's mouth, for this
time," said Tom.

"For this time, to be sure," said Cassy; "but now you've got his ill
will upon you, to follow you day in, day out, hanging like a dog on your
throat,--sucking your blood, bleeding away your life, drop by drop. I
know the man."




Liberty


"No matter with what solemnities he may have been devoted upon the altar
of slavery, the moment he touches the sacred soil of Britain, the
altar and the God sink together in the dust, and he stands redeemed,
regenerated, and disenthralled, by the irresistible genius of universal
emancipation." CURRAN.*

     * John Philpot Curran (1750-1817), Irish orator and judge
     who worked for Catholic emancipation.

A while we must leave Tom in the hands of his persecutors, while we turn
to pursue the fortunes of George and his wife, whom we left in friendly
hands, in a farmhouse on the road-side.

Tom Loker we left groaning and touzling in a most immaculately clean
Quaker bed, under the motherly supervision of Aunt Dorcas, who found him
to the full as tractable a patient as a sick bison.

Imagine a tall, dignified, spiritual woman, whose clear muslin cap
shades waves of silvery hair, parted on a broad, clear forehead, which
overarches thoughtful gray eyes. A snowy handkerchief of lisse crape
is folded neatly across her bosom; her glossy brown silk dress rustles
peacefully, as she glides up and down the chamber.

"The devil!" says Tom Loker, giving a great throw to the bedclothes.

"I must request thee, Thomas, not to use such language," says Aunt
Dorcas, as she quietly rearranged the bed.

"Well, I won't, granny, if I can help it," says Tom; "but it is enough
to make a fellow swear,--so cursedly hot!"

Dorcas removed a comforter from the bed, straightened the clothes
again, and tucked them in till Tom looked something like a chrysalis;
remarking, as she did so,

"I wish, friend, thee would leave off cursing and swearing, and think
upon thy ways."

"What the devil," said Tom, "should I think of _them_ for? Last
thing ever _I_ want to think of--hang it all!" And Tom flounced over,
untucking and disarranging everything, in a manner frightful to behold.

"That fellow and gal are here, I s'pose," said he, sullenly, after a
pause.

"They are so," said Dorcas.

"They'd better be off up to the lake," said Tom; "the quicker the
better."

"Probably they will do so," said Aunt Dorcas, knitting peacefully.

"And hark ye," said Tom; "we've got correspondents in Sandusky, that
watch the boats for us. I don't care if I tell, now. I hope they _will_
get away, just to spite Marks,--the cursed puppy!--d--n him!"

"Thomas!" said Dorcas.

"I tell you, granny, if you bottle a fellow up too tight, I shall
split," said Tom. "But about the gal,--tell 'em to dress her up some
way, so's to alter her. Her description's out in Sandusky."

"We will attend to that matter," said Dorcas, with characteristic
composure.

As we at this place take leave of Tom Loker, we may as well say, that,
having lain three weeks at the Quaker dwelling, sick with a rheumatic
fever, which set in, in company with his other afflictions, Tom
arose from his bed a somewhat sadder and wiser man; and, in place of
slave-catching, betook himself to life in one of the new settlements,
where his talents developed themselves more happily in trapping bears,
wolves, and other inhabitants of the forest, in which he made himself
quite a name in the land. Tom always spoke reverently of the Quakers.
"Nice people," he would say; "wanted to convert me, but couldn't come
it, exactly. But, tell ye what, stranger, they do fix up a sick fellow
first rate,--no mistake. Make jist the tallest kind o' broth and
knicknacks."

As Tom had informed them that their party would be looked for in
Sandusky, it was thought prudent to divide them. Jim, with his old
mother, was forwarded separately; and a night or two after, George and
Eliza, with their child, were driven privately into Sandusky, and lodged
beneath a hospital roof, preparatory to taking their last passage on the
lake.

Their night was now far spent, and the morning star of liberty rose fair
before them!--electric word! What is it? Is there anything more in it
than a name--a rhetorical flourish? Why, men and women of America, does
your heart's blood thrill at that word, for which your fathers bled, and
your braver mothers were willing that their noblest and best should die?

Is there anything in it glorious and dear for a nation, that is not also
glorious and dear for a man? What is freedom to a nation, but freedom
to the individuals in it? What is freedom to that young man, who sits
there, with his arms folded over his broad chest, the tint of African
blood in his cheek, its dark fires in his eyes,--what is freedom to
George Harris? To your fathers, freedom was the right of a nation to be
a nation. To him, it is the right of a man to be a man, and not a brute;
the right to call the wife of his bosom his wife, and to protect her from
lawless violence; the right to protect and educate his child; the right
to have a home of his own, a religion of his own, a character of his
own, unsubject to the will of another. All these thoughts were rolling
and seething in George's breast, as he was pensively leaning his head
on his hand, watching his wife, as she was adapting to her slender and
pretty form the articles of man's attire, in which it was deemed safest
she should make her escape.

"Now for it," said she, as she stood before the glass, and shook down
her silky abundance of black curly hair. "I say, George, it's almost a
pity, isn't it," she said, as she held up some of it, playfully,--"pity
it's all got to come off?"

George smiled sadly, and made no answer.

Eliza turned to the glass, and the scissors glittered as one long lock
after another was detached from her head.

"There, now, that'll do," she said, taking up a hair-brush; "now for a
few fancy touches."

"There, an't I a pretty young fellow?" she said, turning around to her
husband, laughing and blushing at the same time.

"You always will be pretty, do what you will," said George.

"What does make you so sober?" said Eliza, kneeling on one knee, and
laying her hand on his. "We are only within twenty-four hours of Canada,
they say. Only a day and a night on the lake, and then--oh, then!--"

"O, Eliza!" said George, drawing her towards him; "that is it! Now my
fate is all narrowing down to a point. To come so near, to be almost in
sight, and then lose all. I should never live under it, Eliza."

"Don't fear," said his wife, hopefully. "The good Lord would not have
brought us so far, if he didn't mean to carry us through. I seem to feel
him with us, George."

"You are a blessed woman, Eliza!" said George, clasping her with a
convulsive grasp. "But,--oh, tell me! can this great mercy be for us?
Will these years and years of misery come to an end?--shall we be free?

"I am sure of it, George," said Eliza, looking upward, while tears of
hope and enthusiasm shone on her long, dark lashes. "I feel it in me,
that God is going to bring us out of bondage, this very day."

"I will believe you, Eliza," said George, rising suddenly up, "I will
believe,--come let's be off. Well, indeed," said he, holding her off at
arm's length, and looking admiringly at her, "you _are_ a pretty little
fellow. That crop of little, short curls, is quite becoming. Put on your
cap. So--a little to one side. I never saw you look quite so pretty.
But, it's almost time for the carriage;--I wonder if Mrs. Smyth has got
Harry rigged?"

The door opened, and a respectable, middle-aged woman entered, leading
little Harry, dressed in girl's clothes.

"What a pretty girl he makes," said Eliza, turning him round. "We call
him Harriet, you see;--don't the name come nicely?"

The child stood gravely regarding his mother in her new and strange
attire, observing a profound silence, and occasionally drawing deep
sighs, and peeping at her from under his dark curls.

"Does Harry know mamma?" said Eliza, stretching her hands toward him.

The child clung shyly to the woman.

"Come Eliza, why do you try to coax him, when you know that he has got
to be kept away from you?"

"I know it's foolish," said Eliza; "yet, I can't bear to have him turn
away from me. But come,--where's my cloak? Here,--how is it men put on
cloaks, George?"

"You must wear it so," said her husband, throwing it over his shoulders.

"So, then," said Eliza, imitating the motion,--"and I must stamp, and
take long steps, and try to look saucy."

"Don't exert yourself," said George. "There is, now and then, a
modest young man; and I think it would be easier for you to act that
character."

"And these gloves! mercy upon us!" said Eliza; "why, my hands are lost
in them."

"I advise you to keep them on pretty strictly," said George. "Your
slender paw might bring us all out. Now, Mrs. Smyth, you are to go under
our charge, and be our aunty,--you mind."

"I've heard," said Mrs. Smyth, "that there have been men down, warning
all the packet captains against a man and woman, with a little boy."

"They have!" said George. "Well, if we see any such people, we can tell
them."

A hack now drove to the door, and the friendly family who had received
the fugitives crowded around them with farewell greetings.

The disguises the party had assumed were in accordance with the hints
of Tom Loker. Mrs. Smyth, a respectable woman from the settlement in
Canada, whither they were fleeing, being fortunately about crossing the
lake to return thither, had consented to appear as the aunt of little
Harry; and, in order to attach him to her, he had been allowed to
remain, the two last days, under her sole charge; and an extra amount
of petting, jointed to an indefinite amount of seed-cakes and candy, had
cemented a very close attachment on the part of the young gentleman.

The hack drove to the wharf. The two young men, as they appeared, walked
up the plank into the boat, Eliza gallantly giving her arm to Mrs.
Smyth, and George attending to their baggage.

George was standing at the captain's office, settling for his party,
when he overheard two men talking by his side.

"I've watched every one that came on board," said one, "and I know
they're not on this boat."

The voice was that of the clerk of the boat. The speaker whom he
addressed was our sometime friend Marks, who, with that valuable
perseverance which characterized him, had come on to Sandusky, seeking
whom he might devour.

"You would scarcely know the woman from a white one," said Marks. "The
man is a very light mulatto; he has a brand in one of his hands."

The hand with which George was taking the tickets and change trembled a
little; but he turned coolly around, fixed an unconcerned glance on the
face of the speaker, and walked leisurely toward another part of the
boat, where Eliza stood waiting for him.

Mrs. Smyth, with little Harry, sought the seclusion of the ladies'
cabin, where the dark beauty of the supposed little girl drew many
flattering comments from the passengers.

George had the satisfaction, as the bell rang out its farewell peal,
to see Marks walk down the plank to the shore; and drew a long sigh of
relief, when the boat had put a returnless distance between them.

It was a superb day. The blue waves of Lake Erie danced, rippling and
sparkling, in the sun-light. A fresh breeze blew from the shore, and the
lordly boat ploughed her way right gallantly onward.

O, what an untold world there is in one human heart! Who thought, as
George walked calmly up and down the deck of the steamer, with his shy
companion at his side, of all that was burning in his bosom? The mighty
good that seemed approaching seemed too good, too fair, even to be a
reality; and he felt a jealous dread, every moment of the day, that
something would rise to snatch it from him.

But the boat swept on. Hours fleeted, and, at last, clear and full rose
the blessed English shores; shores charmed by a mighty spell,--with
one touch to dissolve every incantation of slavery, no matter in what
language pronounced, or by what national power confirmed.

George and his wife stood arm in arm, as the boat neared the small
town of Amherstberg, in Canada. His breath grew thick and short; a mist
gathered before his eyes; he silently pressed the little hand that lay
trembling on his arm. The bell rang; the boat stopped. Scarcely seeing
