Project Gutenberg's The Fourth Estate, vol. 2, by Armando Palacio Valdés

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Fourth Estate, vol. 2

Author: Armando Palacio Valdés

Release Date: December 23, 2011 [EBook #38394]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FOURTH ESTATE, VOL. 2 ***




Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images available at The Internet Archive)








[Illustration: image of the book's cover]

[Illustration: frontispiece: THE HOLIDAY MAKERS]

The Fourth Estate Vol. II

PALACIO VALDÉS

The Fourth Estate

VOLUME II

TRANSLATED FROM THE SPANISH

WITH FRONTISPIECE

P. F. COLLIER & SON NEW YORK

COPYRIGHT, 1901, BY

BRENTANO'S

_The Fourth Estate_




THE FOURTH ESTATE

VOLUME TWO




CONTENTS


                                                                    PAGE
CHAPTER XVII
Pablito Disports Himself                                               5

CHAPTER XVIII
Secrets of Gonzalo's Life                                             28

CHAPTER XIX
Vanities of Ventura                                                   46

CHAPTER XX
Don Rosendo's Example                                                 61

CHAPTER XXI
Our Esteemed Contemporary                                             74

CHAPTER XXII
Local Politics                                                        91

CHAPTER XXIII
The Duke of Tornos Appears                                           110

CHAPTER XXIV
What Happened at Dinner                                              133

CHAPTER XXV
The Duke's Diversions                                                146

CHAPTER XXVI
Story of a Mandarin                                                  161

CHAPTER XXVII
A Term of Peace                                                      176

CHAPTER XXVIII
Gonzalo Becomes Mayor                                                192

CHAPTER XXIX
A Woman's Sacrifice for Her Brother-in-law                           206

CHAPTER XXX
A Fancy Dress Ball at Sarrio                                         218

CHAPTER XXXI
The Enlightenment of Gonzalo                                         231

CHAPTER XXXII
Retribution                                                          248

CHAPTER XXXIII
The Final Tragedy                                                    273

Mariquita the Bald                                                   291




THE FORTH ESTATE




CHAPTER XVII

PABLITO DISPORTS HIMSELF


"It would be as well to put a light curb on her."

"Oh! a bit," returned Piscis gravely.

Both were silent for some minutes, then Pablito exclaimed:

"Confounded mare! I never in my life saw such a sensitive mouth."

"Like silk," returned his friend in a tone of profound conviction.

Another pause.

"Think we ought to give her more of the spur?"

"The spur is never amiss with any animal," growled Piscis in the same
decided tone.

"We must train her in trotting."

"It would be just as well."

During these remarks the two inseparable equestrians walked right across
the town from the other end, where they had been in conclave in Don
Rosendo's stables. It was ten o'clock at night; the air soft and
springlike. The few people about were hastening homeward, and the only
shops now open were those of popular resort, such as Graell's,
Marano's, and the like. In the Cabin there was a great deal of light and
excitement. Pablito, who shared his father's resentment in the matter,
said to his friend, as they passed the abhorred club:

"Piscis, throw a stone at the door and break the glass."

Thereupon Piscis, always aggressive, took up a flint from the road,
waited for his friend to get round the corner, and then, zas! he flung
it at the Cabin and shivered the windows to atoms. Then he took to his
legs, and for fear of being recognized by those who came out in search
of him, he ran away on all fours with wondrous agility.

There were also some people in the Café de la Marina. They entered the
place and quaffed in silence several glasses of chartreuse without its
interfering with the active working of their brains.

On rising Pablito said:

"The best thing will be to put her in harness with Romeo."

"That is just what I was thinking," returned Piscis eagerly.

After leaving the café Pablito was asked, not in words, but with a
horrible face, whither they were going.

"There."

"Good; then as I pass by my home I will make myself look a bit
shabbier."

They left the principal streets, not without Piscis stopping a minute at
his abode to alter his attire, and then they proceeded to the other end
of the town, where the working classes mostly lived. They stopped in a
certain street, as dull as it was dirty, in front of a poor-looking
house with a rough stone balcony. Pablito looked carefully all round,
and then gave a long, low whistle with the skill which distinguished him
in this acquirement. Then casting an anxious look at the oil-lamp
burning fifty steps off, he said:

"If we could but put out this light."

The terrible Piscis was again to the fore. He stepped to the corner of
the wall, and there extinguished the light with his stick, of course
breaking the glass at the same time.

A woman's form then appeared upon the balcony. Pablito jumped up to the
iron grating of the window, and thence climbed noiselessly on to the
balcony. Piscis meanwhile kept guard at the corner, armed with his
formidable stick. Who was the woman who happened just then to be the
object of the attentions of the Sultan of Sarrio? "The fair Nieves,"
those will reply who have followed the course of this story. Well,
although we do not wish to run counter to the perspicacity of our
readers, truth obliges us to declare that the young woman was not the
fair Nieves, but the fair Valentina.

What! that prim needlewoman so averse to young gentlemen, and who,
moreover, was betrothed to a young man named Cosme?

The same in body and soul, with her golden curls upon her forehead, her
piquant frown, and her nose a little turned up. Pablito was the man to
cause this sort of upset. While he was courting, or pretending to court
Nieves, he was trying the ground with Valentina. But she was more
obdurate than the other. The first kiss that he gave her upon the neck
was when she was drinking some water in the kitchen. The angry
embroideress called it disgraceful; she turned as red as a cherry, her
expressive eyes shone with rage, and she cried:

"Take care, for I won't stand such ways! Get along, and try them on with
those that like them."

By this she doubtless meant Nieves. Pablito proceeded more cautiously
henceforth, but not with less audacity. He did not seem to object to her
brusk manners; he joked with her, and he patiently bore with her
spitfire ways, for Valentina was a type of the artisan in Sarrio whose
want of culture seemed merely an additional charm. The trousseau of
Ventura being finished, there were no more opportunities of meeting, so
Pablito made use of the public balls to lay siege to her.

Not that he had abandoned Nieves. The gay young fellow guessed that the
self-love excited by rivalry would do more in his favor than even the
personal charms with which he was endowed. This perspicacity was innate
in him, and had been clearly shown from the first time he paid attention
to any of the fair sex, which is an additional argument for those who
believe in the preexistence of the human being; because it could only be
by having laid siege to several seamstresses in a previous state of
existence that our young friend could have such clear ideas as to the
course of action that would prove successful.

At last the conquest was made.

She began by giving up her young man, and she ended by making evening
appointments like the present one with the gallant Pablito.

"Is your father asleep?" was the first question that he asked when he
appeared on the balcony.

"What is that to you?" returned the severe seamstress.

"Well, if he is not asleep, you see, by jingo! the thing is serious."

"Hold your tongue, coward, or I will make it hot for you; I will make a
disturbance for the pleasure of seeing you run."

Here Pablito caught her in his arms and kissed her effusively. The young
girl smiled with delight, but she soon frowned, and her whole
physiognomy expressed great displeasure.

"Go away, go away!" she said, pushing him off. "I have something to ask
you. Where were you this morning?"

"This morning? In several places--at home, at the Club, in the stables,
at the end of the landing-stage."

"Were you not in the Calle de San Florencio?"

"Yes, I passed by there two or three times."

"And whom did you meet there?"

"How should I know. Several people."

"Didn't you meet Nieves?" asked the pretty seamstress with suppressed
rage.

"Why, yes, I did meet her," he returned in a careless tone.

"And you did not stop her?"

"No, I simply said good-day."

"Fool! hypocrite! prevaricator!" Valentina exclaimed with fury. "Take
that, you ass!" giving him a terrible pinch on his arm. "You only said
'Good-day' to her, and yet you were a whole hour with her! Take that,
you deceiver! Take that!"

Upon this she gave him so many pinches that the wretched Pablo was
doubled up with pain, while powerless to utter a sound out of respect
for the slumbers of the father of the vixenish girl.

"Stop, Valentina! for goodness' sake. You are indeed mistaken. I stopped
a minute to ask her if she had finished hemming my handkerchief."

"It was no such thing! You stood there for a good hour together,
laughing like mad! I felt inclined to strangle you with my own hands,
you fool! you fool! you more than fool!"

The enraged girl, now maddened with fury, laid her hands on the neck of
her adorer, as if about to strangle him.

Her heart, however, was touched at seeing such a handsome, fine young
fellow with his eyes distended with terror; in fact, Valentina took pity
on him and let him go, but not without giving his arms several
additional pinches.

"You don't deceive me, you know; you don't deceive me! If I find that
you are with her again I won't have anything more to do with you."

"All right, I promise not to speak to her any more; but don't go and
believe the first story you hear about me."

"Will you promise?" asked the obdurate seamstress, looking at him in a
relentless way.

"Never fear."

"Well, you will have to settle with me if you don't keep your word.
Come."

This was the calm and tender mode of Valentina's dealings with the young
swell of Sarrio; and when he gave Piscis, or any other friend, an
account of them, he smiled like a man of the world, and declared that
these irascible, imperious women are most attractive to men, especially
if, like himself, they were somewhat bored.

After they had made peace, or, to speak more correctly, after Valentina
had come to terms, there was a whispered conversation which lasted for
some time. Then nothing more was heard, and one was led to suppose that
the balcony was vacated. If it were not very ugly to cast a slur on a
girl's reputation, one might have suspected that the loving couple had
retired to the interior of the house.

Piscis meanwhile kept guard, walking up and down the street; and the
fact was, he was not the only one so occupied, for a man had posted
himself ever since their arrival in the corner of a doorway, where the
shadows were darkest. Motionless and protected by the gloom, he was
invisible to Piscis. Profiting by a moment when the back of the latter
was turned to the house, the man issued from his hiding-place, and
cautiously approached it. He looked at the balcony and hesitated a few
seconds. This hesitation caused his failure. By the time he jumped up to
catch hold of the bars the terrible Piscis turned and saw him.

With two strides he was under the balcony before the intruder could
swing himself up to it, and his famous stick came down with such force
on the shoulders of the poor man that he loosened his hold on the bars
and measured his length with the street. The wrathful Centaur was about
to repeat the blow, when the fellow jumped up with such agility and
fled away so swiftly that the second blow struck the ground, and he did
not attempt a third.

"Confound it!" cried Piscis.

This exclamation must have reached the ears of his happy friend, for a
few seconds later he appeared on the balcony and swung himself into the
street.

"What is it?" he asked, approaching his friend.

"A man."

"Where?" asked the cavalier, turning round two or three times.

"He has escaped now. I caught him just as he was about to scale the
balcony, and I knocked him down with my stick. Then he took to his
heels. By Jove! Romeo couldn't have beaten him in speed."

"This man," returned Pablito gloomily, "must be an old lover of
Valentina's. What is to be done?"

"Then, if he be a lover, I don't know what he could be here for, unless
it was to give you a licking."

Pablito threw his arm round his friend's shoulder, not to support
himself, although his legs trembled somewhat, but to say, in a low
voice:

"Do you think so?"

"One--or two, or three."

The handsome young man was silent. At the end of a minute he said:

"Do you know him?"

"I? No; and you?"

"I have never seen him; I only know that he is named Cosme, and that he
is a barber."

They left the street in silence, and in silence they arrived at
Belinchon's house. There, on taking leave of each other, Pablito said to
his friend:

"If I go there again, which I doubt, will you do me the kindness not to
lose sight of the balcony, eh?"

"I should rather think so," was the laconic reply of the indomitable
Piscis.

The following day was Sunday, and the usual weekly ball took place at
the school. They danced in the afternoon from three to seven. The room
was spacious, having been built a few years before as a school for
children. The benches were piled up on the teacher's platform; the walls
were covered with maps and proverbs, and as the followers of Terpsichore
danced the languid _habanera_, they could amuse themselves by reading a
portion of the invaluable exhortations tending to show that virtue and
labor are the true treasures of childhood: "The studious child will
receive the reward of his industry;" "Truth and perseverance are
superior to talents." And there at the end over the master's table was
the image of Christ crucified (oh, blasphemy!), mounted on a silken
background, in the presence of these wild polkas and voluptuous dances.

It was there that, without fear of rain or sun, strangers could court
and admire the young girls of Sarrio. And, in truth, all the captains
and pilots who visited the town took care to frequent the place.
Occasionally their admiration led them to overstep the bounds of British
gravity, and their fair beards came too near to the face of some beauty.

"Are you mad, Christian?" she would ask, as she pushed him away.

"Christian! Christian!" the Englishman repeated in astonishment. "What
is being a Christian?"

"Goodness, man, don't you know the doctrine? Well, learn it then."

It would be about five or six in the evening, after four or five waltzes
and as many polkas had been danced, that these ladies were so charming.
The well-circulated blood tinged their cheeks with a bright color; their
fair or dark locks, in pretty disorder, floated in the air or fell in
adorable curls upon their shoulders; their eyes shone like stars in
those heavenly faces, and those ruddy, luscious, half-opened lips
revealed immaculate rows of teeth.

But enough, or we shall never finish; albeit in our admiration of the
working-girls of Sarrio we are outdone by every Englishman who comes
hither.

There was always a sameness in the feminine element of these balls, for
it was entirely composed of young girls of the same rung of the social
ladder. But there was a dangerous variety in the masculine element, for
it consisted of the young gentlemen as well as the young artisans of
Sarrio. Thus the artisans considered that their rights were encroached
upon by the rival charms of the young gentlemen, and the repeated
unequal marriages that took place in the town showed how they had been
ousted.

As already remarked, the West Indians were generally satisfied with the
somewhat poor and faded young ladies of the place, but the young men
were more taken with the charms of the working-girls. Thus the poor
artisans and sailors were outdone by the gentry. What were they to do?

They found some consolation in visits to the taverns, and in the use of
their sticks, which made every ball the scene of a shower of blows, and
two or three gentlemen generally left the school with broken heads on a
Sunday.

Pablito had come off pretty well hitherto, thanks to his most faithful
Piscis, who undertook to receive the blows intended for him. The only
inconvenience he suffered at most of these gatherings was the loss of
his hat, and this happened so repeatedly that he was quite certain that
they picked a quarrel with him to make him lose it. When an artisan
wanted a hat he knew how to get one.

But Piscis could not save him from the blows he received that Sunday;
and this not from want of will on the part of the Centaur, but because
there are things that really can not be done. With what care did that
gallant youth twist the ends of his mustache before his looking-glass!
How he dressed his cheeks with a cream he had sent for from Madrid, and
what havoc was made of his toilet an hour afterward!

He walked across the room, looking so handsome and so attractive that it
was a pleasure to see him as he cast his eyes from one side to another,
as all men well versed in his accomplishments are prone to do.
Occasionally on passing a young lady he would say, "Pretty as ever,
Julia!" or else, "Your eyes are killing"; or, "Torquata, there's no one
to come up to you in Sarrio," or any other remark flattering to a girl.
But while saying these things he maintained his gravity of demeanor, as
he was aware that it was one of his most irresistible charms.

He waited for Valentina for some time, but the room was full of ladies,
and the brass orchestra had played two dances without the pretty
seamstress making her appearance. The strains of a mazurka began, the
gilded youth encircled the slender waists of the working-girls, but
Pablito, faithful to the absent, stood idle, looking on at the swift
couples as they passed before him.

The mazurka over, he began to think that Valentina would not come. In
the sudden way he seized an idea he was very like his father,
particularly when flushed with wine, so that in a few minutes he was
quite convinced of the fact. This sudden fancy happened to be coincident
with the entrance into the room of the fair Nieves. Their eyes met, and
the poor girl, shamefully neglected for nearly two months, smiled
sweetly at him. This sweetness had been precisely the cause of her
failure, for the self-sufficient Pablito soon wearied of sweet women.
Nevertheless, he returned the smile, and on coming to her side he said,
teasingly:

"Are you going to frighten the bulls, Nieves?"

The embroideress wore a scarlet sash at her waist, and this remark of
her ex-admirer so flustered her that she could not reply. She smiled
again, and said, "Ah!" "Yes," "No," and uttered a few more words that we
do not remember, and looked as if she would faint with emotion. The next
time he came across her he asked if she would like to dance the first
polka with him. "The first, the second, the third, and all the polkas in
the world," returned Nieves, with trembling lips. Pablo was filled with
remorse after having engaged himself for the polka. "What a fool, what a
brute I am! And suppose Valentina comes in now!"

But she did not come. The orchestra struck up the opening bars, and the
youth, without turning his eyes from the door, encircled the waist of
the embroideress and dashed rapidly into the centre of the room. Other
young people, no less rapid, dashed from the opposite side, and then
ensued one shock, then another, and then another. Such collisions formed
the chief attraction of these balls, and the young girls, instead of
being angry at nearly losing their footing and having their hair
tumbled, laughed with infinite pleasure. Pablo and Nieves, who could not
take four turns without colliding with another couple, were perfectly
charmed. Nevertheless, the young man felt his legs tremble whenever he
passed the door, and he always left it as quickly as possible. When the
orchestra had finished he took his partner to a corner of the room and
then sat down a minute, and Pablito felt a spark of feeling glow in the
ashes of his love for that girl so cheerful, so good-tempered, and so
affectionate.

"Yes, I wanted to dance with you, Nieves," he said as he wiped his brow
with his handkerchief.

"And I with you, Pablo."

"You?"

The girl blushed.

"Do you say you instead of thou now?"

"It is now so long ago."

"You are right. But see, I have not forgotten."

"On Wednesday I saw you--I saw you in the Nieva road--you were on a
white horse."

"It was a mare."

"I thought it would throw you."

"Throw me!" exclaimed Pablito, slightly frowning. "It was a bit fresh,
child; a mare does not throw me so easily."

"But it reared up so! It almost stood upright. Goodness, how frightened
I was!"

"I was teaching it to step high," returned the youth, with a smile of
superiority. "As she has not been worked before she resisted a bit.
Sometimes her mouth seems too tender, but, taking her all round, Linda
is a fine creature. Look here, when I bought her, or, rather, when I
changed Negress--and she cost me over and above 1,500 reales--for her
last October, she had a temper, indeed; she stuck in the middle of the
road, she shied at the carts and carriages--in short, she was an
impossible creature, and I said to myself: 'What is to be done with this
mare?'"

Pablito, in whose heart the girl had touched a sensitive chord, talked
long and brilliantly on his equestrian deeds. Nieves listened with
rapturous delight, thinking that behind the minute description of
Linda's peccadillos she was going to find her lost love.

But suddenly the orator (pof!) received a blow in the middle of his
face, the listener (pof!) received another, and before they had
recovered from their surprise they received two more--pof! pof!

The choleric Valentina was the author of this attack, and in less than a
minute she had overwhelmed them with blows.

Pablito had nothing for it but to make his escape as gracefully as he
could and retire to the street. Nieves remained like an innocent dove in
the clutches of a vulture, until Valentina, seeing she could go no
further, as her arms were seized by some of the party, quickly tore
herself free, left the room, where the next dance was about to begin,
and rushed into the street.

Pablito was walking slowly, still feeling quite stunned, when he felt a
terrible pain in his arm. Being quite accustomed to that kind of
torture, he said, without turning his head:

"Valentina!"

"It is I! Do you think you are going to make me a laughing-stock?"

"What you have just done is very ugly," replied the youth in an angry
tone, and looking his beloved in the face. "You have made a scandal, and
you have made me ridiculous. I will not tolerate that, do you hear?"

"You won't tolerate it? Well, look here, if I see you again with her I
will not be contented with what I did to-day--I will strike at you both
with a knife."

"But I won't allow you to do anything of the sort; neither will I have
you speak to me when I am with another girl!" cried the young man, more
and more infuriated.

"Not when I see you with that cat! We'll see about that, we'll see!"

Then the handsome youth, justly enraged and oblivious in his fury of all
the laws of gallantry, discharged a blow at the face of his dear one,
and then another, and then another, until, in fact, she had a regular
buffeting. The pretty seamstress patiently submitted to this treatment
of her admirer without evincing the slightest sign of resistance, nor
even of avoidance of the blows. When Pablito had finished, she said,
with delightful naturalness:

"Have you done now?"

"For the present, but I shall have to do it again!" roared the young
man, blind with rage.

"Well, you can do it whenever you like, and I will bear it all without
moving; but, beat me or not, I have told you what I shall do if I find
you talking with her again. Now take me back to the ball."

"I don't want to."

"Very well; then take me somewhere else where I can put my hair
straight, for you have quite disheveled it."

The youth had to obey, and so he escorted her to the Star Café, thinking
on the way that he had to pay rather dearly for his conquests.

A few days later he had still greater reason to come to that conclusion.
It was at the Madrileña barber's where he frequently went to be shaved
and have his hair cut.

Accompanied by his chief equerry, he had entered the place and taken a
seat on the sofa to await his turn.

"At your pleasure, sir," said a pale young man with a slight black
mustache, looking across at him as he turned a seat round.

Pablito went forward in an absent sort of way, and dropped into the
armchair with the languid grace adopted by those endowed by Providence
with great superiority.

The lad covered his face with soap, and the Belinchon youth, with his
proud head thrown back, waited with majestic calm for the dark hue
covering his cheeks to be removed. He kept his eyes closed so as better
to enjoy the vague poetic thoughts passing through his mind, for his
head was always full of ideas on leaving the stable. His legs were
stretched out comfortably under the table, and his gloved hands hung
lazily from the arms of the chair.

"Fernando," said the barber, who was about to shave him, to one of his
companions.

"What do you want, Cosme?"

This name made Pablito tremble without knowing why; he opened his eyes,
and gave a long look at the hairdresser. He did not know him, he was a
new hand in the establishment; but this, instead of calming him, made
him change his position several times, with a loss of his habitual ease
and languor.

"Can you give me the razor that was sharpened to-day?"

"Here it is."

Fernando stretched out his hand and gave the razor to Cosme. A vague
desire to rise from his seat now came into Pablito's mind, but before he
could do so the barber had taken him by the nose and was proceeding to
shave him.

At the end of some minutes, during which our friend, from under his long
eyelashes, followed with some alarm the movements of the barber's hand,
Cosme said to him, in a low voice, while his lips wreathed with a forced
smile which much enlarged his mouth:

"You are Señorito Belinchon, eh?"

"Yes," was the reply.

"I have known you for some time," continued the barber, still with the
same voice and smile. "Oh, yes, for a long time. You don't know me,
that's evident. Gentlemen don't take much notice of us. I often see you
about here on horseback, and sometimes on foot, and I frequently notice
you at the balls at the school. You dance very well, sir, very well."

"Tush!" returned Pablito, whose desire to rise was now quite
overwhelming.

"Yes, very well; and, moreover, you know how to choose a partner.
Caramba, sir, what pretty girls you always take, sir! Some months ago
you were always dancing with a red-haired girl. She is the sister of a
friend of mine. But now you are always dancing with one prettier
still--Valentina. Caramba, what a good eye you have, sir! I have known
this Valentina since I was a boy--we were friends at one time. Haven't
you heard her talk of me--of Cosme?"

"No," murmured the youth, who was breaking out into a cold sweat.

"Well, that's strange, as we were great friends--so great that three
months ago we were going to be married. But then you came along, sir,
and all was over."

Cosme uttered these last words in a tremulous voice. Pablito had now
great cold drops of sweat upon his brow.

Like his illustrious father, Pablo had a horror of treachery and
deceit.

"Of course, what could one expect?" continued the barber, with the
uncertain tone of voice divided between the desire to laugh or to weep,
and at the same time he dexterously passed the razor across the throat
of the gay Lothario to do away with a few encroaching hairs. "Of course
a young gentleman of the upper class like you can soon oust a rough
fellow like me. Girls lose their heads directly one of your sort
whispers sweet nothings in their ears. They do it to amuse themselves,
when it is for nothing worse. It is too well known that you have no
intention of marrying Valentina. You like to spend your evenings with
her on the balcony, eh? And then you'll forget her. But I truly loved
the girl."

The barber's voice trembled again, and his hand also shook; but Pablito
was motionless, he was petrified.

"But now," continued Cosme, "who would marry her but a madman? We poor
are beneath you, and we have to bear these things. If you had been my
equal we would have met on fair ground. But if I attacked you I should
soon have my head broken and be put into prison. And yet," he continued
after a moment's silence, in a hoarser tone, "if I now went suddenly
mad, sir, farewell to horses and carriages, farewell to balls, farewell
to Valentina; just by a slight stroke with this razor--pif!--and all
would be over forever--"

Pablito, whose face was now as white without the soap as it had been
with it, then uttered such a cry of horror and misery that Piscis, whose
eyes had been suspiciously fixed upon the barber, now jumped up suddenly
and caught him by the arms; Pablo sprang from his seat, and the master
and all his employees cried out simultaneously:

"What is it?"

"Seize the murderer!" exclaimed Pablito, springing upon Cosme, who was
as pale as death under his arrest. In one instant the gay young man,
still cold with fear, told them what had happened, and poor Cosme was
kicked out of the shop by the master, who did not wish to lose the best
customer in the town.




CHAPTER XVIII

SECRETS OF GONZALO'S LIFE


Gonzalo, recollecting that the blister had not been attended to which
had been put on him the previous day, rang the bell violently. He was
lying on his back in bed, gazing at the arabesques on the ceiling, the
room being well lighted by two windows. He was not in his own bedroom,
but in his sitting-room, where a bed was put up the first day he was
taken ill. Ventura had objected to leaving their room, and as they could
not both be there he had been the one to move. The illness had proved as
serious as it was sudden--it was erysipelas, causing inflammation in his
face, hands, and legs, which had nearly cost him his life.

It had been kept from his head by strong applications to his legs, and
the doctor put blisters on various parts of his body.

"What do you want, sir?" said the maid, half opening the door.

"Be so kind as to ask my wife to come."

At the end of a minute the servant reappeared, and said:

"She is coming directly."

The young man waited, and in ten minutes' time the fair head of his wife
appeared at the door.

"What do you want, my love?" she asked without coming in, and in a tone
too careless to accord with the tenderness of the words.

"Come in. It is eleven o'clock, and the blister has not been attended to
yet."

"I thought you would wait for the doctor to do it," she said as she
hesitatingly entered the room, resplendent in a magnificent blue silk
dress.

"He did not say he would come and take it off; besides, it hurts me very
much."

The girl approached the bed, and after a few moments' silence she put
her hand upon her husband's head and said:

"Won't it be better to wait for the doctor to do it?"

"No, no," he returned, now fairly cross; "it is hurting very much. Fetch
the lint and the ointment and a pair of sharp scissors."

Ventura left the room without replying, and soon returned with the
necessaries in her hand. She looked grave and seemed absent, while her
face betrayed her aversion to attendance at the sick-bed.

After she had put the things on the little table by the bedside, and
spread some ointment upon the lint with a knife, the young wife said
softly:

"Come along."

Gonzalo raised himself in bed, and, opening his shirt, he exposed his
herculean chest, on the right side of which there was the blister. The
wife leaned forward to raise the linen covering, and Gonzalo profited by
the occasion to kiss her forehead.

Nothing was said. The blister was large, and surrounded by a circle of
inflamed flesh. Ventura straightened herself and said, with her usual
want of feeling:

"Bah, bah, we had better wait for the doctor; he won't be late. If you
like we will send him a message."

"I have said no," returned the young man, frowning angrily. "Take the
scissors and snip the blister all round, then put the linen on the
wound, and it is done. You see, it is very easy."

Ventura did not answer. She took the scissors, and, bending over him
again, began to snip the blister.

"Does it hurt you?"

"It is nothing; go on."

But when the wound was disclosed to view the girl could not repress a
gesture of repugnance, which did not escape her husband's sight; so that
his eyes darkened and his forehead corrugated with angry lines.

"Look here, stop, stop. We will wait for the doctor to come," he said,
taking hold of her gently, but firmly, by the wrist.

Ventura looked at him in surprise.

"Why?"

"Never mind; go away, go away," he returned quickly, fastening his
shirt, and drawing up the bedclothes about him.

Ventura stood with the scissors in her hand and looked at him fixedly in
astonishment. Her husband lay with the frown still upon his forehead and
with his eyes fixed on the ceiling.

"But why? What have I done to you, boy?"

"Nothing, nothing, only go and let me be."

The girl stood looking at him a few more minutes, and then, flying into
a rage, she dashed the scissors on the floor and said in the angry,
haughty tone she knew so well how to give to her words when she liked:

"I am glad of it, for the spectacle was not very pleasant, especially
just before dinner."

Then, as she turned her steps toward the door, Gonzalo retorted, with a
sarcastic smile:

"And I am glad to have afforded you this pleasure."

When left alone the young man's eyes flamed with fury, his lips
trembled, he crumpled the sheet with twitching fingers, and he broke
into a torrent of awful interjections peculiar to the brief and terrible
rages of men of sanguine temperament.

Before he had completely got over his excitement he heard a soft tap at
the door, and, thinking it was his wife, he called out angrily:

"Who is it?"

The person who had knocked, alarmed doubtless by the tone of his voice,
waited a minute before replying. At last a soft voice said:

"It is I, Gonzalo."

"Ah, excuse me, Cecilia. Come in," he returned, suddenly mollified. His
sister-in-law opened the door, came in, and carefully shut it behind
her.

"I came to know how you are, and to tell you that if you want the
lemonade it is ready made."

"I am better, thank you. If I keep on like this I shall be able to get
up to-morrow or next day."

"Has the blister been taken off?"

"Ventura began doing it just now, but she did not finish," he replied,
as a frown again darkened his brow.

"Yes, I just met her in the passage, and she told me that you were cross
because you thought the task was repugnant to her," said Cecilia,
smiling kindly.

"It is not that, it is not that," returned the young man in an impatient
tone and somewhat shamefacedly.

"You must forgive her, for she is not accustomed to these things. She
is but a child. Besides, in her state of health she is easily upset."

"It is not that!" repeated the young man with increased impatience, and
slightly raising his head from the pillows. "I should be very stupid and
very selfish if I were to put myself out for something which, after all,
she can not help. That is a matter of temperament, and I am accustomed
to bear it in mind, especially as it is a question of my wife, and she
is not well. But it is more than that, and this is the last straw that
breaks the camel's back. I have now been in bed ten days and she has not
entered the room more than two or three times a day, and those occasions
were generally when I sent for her. Do you think that is how a husband
ought to be treated by a wife? If it had not been for you and for
mama--especially you--I should have been left to servants, like in a
hospital."

"Oh, no, Gonzalo."

"Yes, yes, Cecilia," he returned emphatically, and raising himself up,
"abandoned. My wife only appears when anybody comes to see me. Then,
yes, she comes sweeping in, redolent with perfumes and glazing with
colors. But as to bringing me tisanes, carrying out the doctor's orders,
or keeping me company a while by reading or talking--nothing of the
sort. Just now I begged her to take off the blister for me, and even as
I mentioned it her whole face changed. She began by making excuses to
avoid doing it, and it was only when I insisted on it that she made up
her mind to do it, but with such a bad grace and with such a cross face
that I felt inclined to tear the things out of her hand. I should not
have had a spark of dignity or self-respect if I had let her go on."

In his increasing excitement Gonzalo quite raised himself up in bed, and
Cecilia stood in the middle of the room listening to him in dismay and
distress, without knowing what to reply. She wanted to defend her
sister, but she had no arguments weighty enough to contravene those of
her brother-in-law.

"Gonzalo," she said at last, with a serene face and in a firm voice,
"the pain you have had has somewhat excited you, and prevented your
seeing things as they really are. It is possible that Ventura has been
rather neglectful of her duties, but be quite assured that it was not
from lack of will. I know her well, and I know that her character is not
one to lend itself to the consideration and care required by an invalid.
She is not fit for a sick nurse. Besides, we must recollect that her
present state of health excuses her from many things."

"But if it be so in everything, Cecilia; if it be so in everything?"
returned the young man, both crossly and quickly. "If she be an
empty-headed girl? The only thing of any importance in the world to her
is herself--her beauty, her dresses, her jewels; all the rest--father,
mother, brother, sister, and husband--all go for naught. I am certain
she has been more interested in her hat from Paris than in my illness."

"Oh, don't say that, for goodness' sake! You are mad."

"I am not mad, it is the simple truth."

And in rapid, stirring tones, frequently interrupted by the intensity of
his anger, he laid bare his troubles, seeming to take pleasure in
reopening the wounds he had received in his matrimonial life. Ventura
had a character diametrically opposed to his. It was not possible to get
on with her for more than an hour, because when there was peace, and no
cause for dispute, she did not rest until she had found one, doubtless
for the pleasure of making up the quarrel again. If he did anything to
give her any enjoyment, instead of thanking him she only acknowledged it
by some joke or sarcasm. Nothing seemed of any importance to her, and
his greatest sacrifices were of no account. It was impossible to make
her think of anything beyond her dresses, perfumes, and ribbons. What a
life she led him those three months she spent with him in Madrid! They
were continually visiting drapers, jewelers, and dressmakers. The
evenings were invariably spent at the play, and however much his head
ached, or however tired he was, he had to appear in some box at the
Royal or Prince's theatre.

The money they spent there amounted to a considerable sum. He thought he
had provided himself with sufficient funds, but he had been obliged to
send home three times for more. Then seeing that his income would not
suffice him for this style of living, especially if he had several
children, he thought of starting a brewery, and thus turn to account the
study he had given the subject. But Ventura firmly set her face against
such a proceeding, saying that she declined being "a brewer's wife."

He was certain that the bad state of his blood, which had brought on the
sudden attack of erysipelas, was due to the life he had led at Madrid
and subsequently in Sarrio. This was quite evident, for he required a
life of activity and work, an outdoor life with shooting and riding; his
plethoric temperament required exercise, and the sedentary life which
suited Ventura, with the eternal theatre and visits, and long evenings
without food, were death to him, and his blood became as thick as oil.
But what did all that signify to her? All she cared about was to please
herself once and for all. In Madrid she had learned to use rouge--an
atrocious thing, because she was naturally as white as milk; but
although he had impressed upon her several times the horror that he had
of the fashion, she paid no attention to him.

While Gonzalo unburdened himself in this uninterrupted torrent of words
his face successively expressed the indignation, sadness, anger, and
disappointment with which the recollection of his sufferings filled him.
His great athletic form moved convulsively on the bed, sometimes raising
itself and at other times throwing itself back, while his trembling,
clenched hands mechanically pulled up the bedclothes which his
excitement continually disarranged. Cecilia listened with her head bent
and her hands clasped, hoping that his temper would calm after the
disburdenment of his troubles. And so it was, for when he had thoroughly
exhausted himself he drew the sheet up to his eyes, and only gave vent
to a series of interminable groans mingled with a few incoherent
utterances.

Then Cecilia said, in a very soft voice:

"I don't know what to say to all this, Gonzalo. It is always very
dangerous to meddle with matrimonial disagreements; and if any one ought
to interfere about yours it is not for me, but for mama. But I have
always heard that all marriages have trials and troubles at the
beginning, until the characters become molded to each other. But such
troubles go by like clouds in summer; as long as the hearts are united
little differences are of little consequence. And fortunately there is
no fear about that in this case--you love Ventura."

"Oh, more and more every day!" he exclaimed, angry with himself. "I am
in love like an ass! Yes, yes, like an ass!"

A shade of sorrow, swift as lightning, passed over Cecilia's clear eyes,
but they instantly resumed their usual serene brightness.

"And she also loves you, don't doubt it. Her disposition is light,
perhaps somewhat capricious, because she has always been the spoiled
child of the house; she is incapable of bearing malice, but she acts
without thinking, on the impulse of the moment. Besides, Gonzalo," she
added, smiling, "recollect you owe her especial consideration just now,
and even additional tenderness, if it be possible."

Then the girl in delicate language touched upon the future child, the
bond that would indissolubly solder the union of their hearts. This
child, for which the whole house was now working, would dissipate with
its innocent smile the clouds that threatened to momentarily darken the
love of its parents. Once it is in the world, what time will Venturita
have for rouge! No; she will have enough to do to tend it, feed it, and
soothe it when fretful. And the father will be so taken up with it that
he will not have time to notice what dress his wife had donned, or
whether she was in a good or bad humor. Cecilia's voice, soft and
persuasive albeit somewhat hesitating, which gave a peculiarly touching
and humble effect to her tones, was enough to melt anybody's heart, and
her brother-in-law's was not proof against it.

He suddenly calmed down, and his face expanded with a smile as he
interrupted her by saying:

"Child, what a good barrister you would make!"

"It is because I am in the right," she replied, laughing.

"And if you were not, you would make yourself so. Well, well, it is over
now! My tempers don't last long, and particularly when you begin to
speak I am done for. No orator can come up to your way of accumulating
arguments on your own side. Fancy bringing in the child!"

Cecilia could not forbear laughing.

"Confess that you missed no point."

"I don't deny it."

And both laughed merrily, joking each other affectionately, in the
brotherly and sisterly way that delighted them.

At last Cecilia was about to take her departure. But before reaching the
door she turned and asked, with a timidity which betrayed her strong
concern on the subject:

"Would you like me to take off the blister? It must hurt you."

The young man hesitated an instant, fearful of offending his
sister-in-law's delicacy.

"If you like. There is no necessity. Perhaps it will be disagreeable to
you."

But Cecilia had already approached the bed and put the lint, ointment,
and scissors in order. She cut a fresh piece of lint and carefully
spread the ointment upon it. Gonzalo watched her somewhat shyly. She
kept silent in her heroic efforts to overcome the confusion which nearly
overwhelmed her. She was indeed repenting her suggestion, and she spent
some minutes passing the knife numberless times over the lint, with
downcast looks, feigning engrossing attention to the task. At last, with
a supreme effort she took up the lint, and, raising her eyes to her
brother-in-law, she said, with assumed indifference:

"Are you ready?"

Gonzalo with a hesitating hand pushed back the bedclothes, and proceeded
to unfasten his night-shirt slowly and shyly, until he had uncovered his
muscular chest.

"Nice sight before dinner!" he exclaimed shamefacedly, repeating the
remark expressed by his wife.

Cecilia did not reply, but proceeded to examine the wound still half
covered with the blister that Ventura did not finish removing. Then she
took the scissors, and with a firm hand she snipped away what remained
of it.

"Do I hurt you?" she asked.

"Not at all."

When the wound was laid bare, as large as the palm of one's hand, she
gently laid the lint upon it, passed her hand several times over it to
adjust it, put some linen over the lint, and without leaving off the
pressure with her left hand, she took a band from the little table to
keep the plaster in its place.

Then it was necessary to get the bandage round his back so as to tie it
in front.

"Can't you do it?" he said, laughing nervously.

She did not reply, for she wished by her gravity to overcome the
confusion to which she was a prey. She only betrayed her emotion by the
slight trembling of her lips. Her eyes, half closed, shone under her
long lashes with a real intense pleasure which the grave and quiet
expression of her face could not conceal.

Gonzalo tried to cross the strings behind him, but it was impossible,
and Cecilia came to his assistance. Her hand slightly trembled as it
touched the young man's form, but she did not shrink from the
performance of her task.

"A fine chest, eh?" he said with affected unconcern, to hide the
embarrassment from which they were both suffering.

"It is rather," returned Cecilia.

"Don't think it is quite natural. I got these arms and chest by rowing
on the Thames."

"Rowing?"

"Yes, rowing. The richest youths there don a sailor's vest or shirt, and
indeed it is considered fashionable to do so on the water. What trips
we had down that river! Then every now and then there was a regatta, and
the people flocked thither as they do to a bull-fight in Madrid. Fine
races were held; it is a delicious amusement. What an excitement there
was among us for days beforehand!"

He was quite elated at the recollection of those pleasant hours of
health and strength, when neither love nor any domestic cares disturbed
his merry life as a rich young athlete. Then seeing Cecilia's attention,
he gave minute descriptions of little incidents in his athletic career.
He told her of the races he won, those that he lost, and all the
particulars relating to them. He recounted his experiences before and
after the events, the kind of diet which he had to adopt to gain
strength and to lose fat; he described the costume that he wore, even to
the shape of the boots, and he dilated on the cries of the crowd on the
banks of the river.

"There were none there stronger than you," she said, her eyes eloquent
with admiration.

"Oh, yes, there were none bigger than I, but there were some stronger,"
he modestly replied.

The shyness of both had now vanished, and the old, pleasant sense of
familiarity had reasserted itself. As he lay upon the bed, with his arms
stretched out on the counterpane, he said that when he was quite himself
again he would go to Tejada, for he would have to change his mode of
life to avoid another illness; he thought of going in seriously for
sport, he would set up a gymnasium near the house--in short, he made up
his mind to be a different man altogether. Cecilia applauded his plans,
and promised to accompany him sometimes. She liked Tejada much better
than Sarrio; she was born for a country life, but her brother-in-law
derided these remarks.

"You don't know what it is going shooting down there. I daresay I should
have to carry you in my arms as I did Ventura."

"No fear; I am stronger than I look."

When the girl at last was leaving the room Gonzalo said timidly:

"Couldn't you read to me a little?"

Cecilia had thought of the idea herself, but as the young man had
complained of his wife not doing so, she thought it would put Ventura in
a bad position if she offered to do so.

"What would you like me to read?"

"Anything, as long as it is not one of those horrible novels that my
wife is so fond of."

"All right, I will read you 'The Christian Year.'"

"Oh, come!" he exclaimed, laughing.

So Cecilia then took from the shelf a volume of poems and began to read,
seated near the foot of the bed. In a quarter of an hour Gonzalo fell
into a delicious sleep as tranquil as a child. The girl stopped reading
and looked at him attentively, or rather fixed her loving eyes on him
for a long time.

Then, thinking she heard steps in the passage, and not wishing to be
found in that attitude, she jumped up quickly from her chair and left
the room on tiptoe. When Gonzalo was convalescent he carried out his
wish of going to Tejada, and all the family accompanied him with the
exception of Don Rosendo. It was the month of October, and instead of
the yellow foliage of other estates, Don Rosendo's place, full of firs,
presented a gloomy appearance not at all pleasing to the eye. The young
man carried out his program of a hygienic life. He rose early, took his
gun, called his dogs, and struck across the country, returning most days
with a few partridges in his bag, and as hungry as a cannibal. When his
expeditions were shorter Cecilia accompanied him, according to her
promise. Although on these occasions few partridges were shot, Gonzalo
enjoyed the society of such a sympathetic, agreeable companion. The girl
would never confess to being tired, but he always guessed it by her
faltering step, and made her sit down until she was rested, when the
time passed quickly in joking and talking.

But she had to struggle between her delight in these expeditions and the
promises she had made her sister to work at the wardrobe for the child.

When the time had come to think about it, Ventura was about to order it
from Madrid, but Cecilia said to her:

"If I have the patterns I will undertake to make the things as well as
if they came from the city."

Ventura demurred a little at first, but seeing that her sister was set
upon the task, she soon gave in, and Cecilia commenced the work with
such enthusiasm that she hardly gave herself time to eat and sleep.

Sometimes, when her brother-in-law wanted her to go out, she would say:

"No, you must let me work to-day; I have hardly done anything the last
three days."

And when he insisted and made light of her labors, she gave in, saying:

"Very well, it will be all the worse for you when you find that the
child has nothing to wear when it arrives."

"Don't trouble about that, dear," he returned, laughing. "I have
sufficient shirts for him and myself too, particularly if he is likely
to have a predilection for low collars."

By the end of the month the open air and sun had made Cecilia very much
stronger, and Gonzalo declared that she looked like a boy, a sailor boy,
so sunburnt was her face.




CHAPTER XIX

VANITIES OF VENTURA


In the meanwhile Ventura led her sultana-like life, which was now more
excusable. She hardly ever left the house. The minute care of her
appearance took up a great deal of her time, and the rest of it was
spent in the perusal of light novels. She grew more beautiful every day,
and the incessant care of her person contributed not a little to
increase her charms. She was like an artist in the indefatigable manner
in which she touched and retouched her work in attending to her hair,
her skin, her teeth, and her hands. Marriage had added to her beauty by
giving an additional fulness and womanliness to her figure, and changing
her springtide prettiness into a more developed loveliness. Even her
state of health was no draw-back to her beauty, for it only seemed to
give a greater dignity to her appearance. Then the wonderful taste, or
better said, art, with which she knew how to adapt the color and form of
her dress to her figure brought out all the charms of her lovely
person.

And so the whole house was at Ventura's feet. All the human figures on
those Chinese towers were swayed by her will, as if she were some feared
and adored goddess. Even Doña Paula, who had been somewhat cool to her
during the first months of her married life, succumbed to the sway.

Ventura did not abuse her power as long as everything went as she
wished, and she took care that it always did. So nobody but herself knew
when they would return to Sarrio; the cook never arranged a meal without
consulting her; the coachman came up every day to ask her at what time
the carriage was wanted, and the gardener never moved a plant without
her sanction. On the other hand, she did not concern herself at all
about her husband's mode of amusement. Only once, when seeing him about
to go out with Cecilia, she said with a smile before her sister and a
few other people:

"You and Cecilia are becoming very friendly. I shall begin to be
jealous."

But even as she said those words she gave the young man one of her
dominating looks, which showed that she knew the strength of her power.
Gonzalo could not break his chain, although he had considerably
lengthened it, and he always returned to her feet quiet and submissive,
like a comet that passes through space in its whirling course, and
then, when at an immeasurable distance from the sun, quietly turns
itself toward it.

Gonzalo returned that look with one of absolute submission, but Cecilia
turned slightly pale, and smiled to hide her confusion.

"Come, be off. I don't want to spoil your pleasure; but," she added, "if
you do take advantage of me the worse for you, because revenge would be
mine."

The joke was not a pretty one, considering the former relations that had
existed between Cecilia and Gonzalo; but Venturita was not the woman to
spare them on that account. The first days of December saw them all back
in Sarrio, and a month later Ventura gave birth to a beautiful baby
girl, pink and white like herself. Gonzalo was so much in love with his
wife that he hailed it with pleasure, but not with that rapture and
delight with which some men greet their first-born. His interest was
chiefly centred in the mother, with whom everything went well. He was
constantly in and out of her room, he felt her pulse and pestered Don
Rufo with questions. The doctor considered that Ventura might easily
nurse her child, who was strong and well formed. In consideration of the
possibility of finding it exhausting, the girl had at first vaguely and
then definitely expressed her objection to the course, so Gonzalo soon
concurred in this decision, and, moreover, considered it quite
reasonable. Doña Paula, on the other hand, was very indignant, but she
did not dare to express her disapproval to Ventura's face.

Cecilia meanwhile devoted such care and attention to the baby that she
soon had entire charge of it.

She had the nurse's bed and the child's bath brought into her own room,
as it was supposed to make Ventura ill to have her nights disturbed,
while it did not hurt her to have her sleep broken. And, in truth, she
was the first to jump up when the child cried, and take it to the nurse;
and if that did not quiet it, she walked for hours up and down the room
with it in her arms, until she succeeded in putting it to sleep.

So the young married couple had their nights as utterly undisturbed as
hitherto. When the baby was brought to its mother in the morning,
Cecilia had already bathed it in warm water and dressed it in clean
clothes. Ventura played with it a little, and when the time came for her
retirement into her dressing-room she gave it back to her sister.

In like manner, although with a certain timidity, due to her desire not
to offend her sister, or to show the difference in their dispositions,
Cecilia undertook the care of Gonzalo's clothes and the order of his
sitting-room; and her brother-in-law finally constantly gave her the
keys of his wardrobe, saying:

"Cecilia, I am going to dress."

Then the girl would run to his room and return in a few moments, saying:
"Your things are all ready." Whereupon Gonzalo would find his clothes
laid out on the bed, his shirt with the studs put in, and his boots
ready cleaned by the table.

"Cecilia, the fur has come a little undone on my coat." When he put it
on again it was mended. And she who cared very little about her own
dress was very particular about her brother-in-law being spick and span,
and she would not for anything allow him to have soiled boots or a dirty
collar. She delighted in going to the window and peeping at him through
the curtain as he sallied forth to the café in a fine new suit, and with
a cigar in his mouth; and she stood staring after him till he turned the
corner, and watched till the smoke from his cigar had vanished.

One day, feeling angry with himself at spending so much money, Gonzalo
gave Cecilia the key of his cash-box, saying:

"Look here, take care of this key; neither Ventura nor I is a good
manager. When we want money you can put it down in this note-book, and
then let us know at the end of the month what we have spent. Perhaps we
shall keep a little order like that."

Being thus provided with a steward, the married couple found their
affairs improve. When any bill came in Gonzalo said to the servant with
a smile:

"Take it to the manager."

Whereupon the servant also smiled, and took it to Cecilia.

This intimacy, this close companionship in almost all the acts of daily
life, engendered utter confidence between the two, particularly on
Gonzalo's side. Nothing happened to him in the street or in the café but
he came and told Cecilia, who was never tired of listening; his wife, on
the other hand, never wanted to hear about his sport, his vexations, or
his friends' affairs, for very little interested her beyond the
fashions, balls, evening parties, and the marriages of the fashionables
of Spain.

Her curiosity was mostly exercised in all concerning the king and queen
and royal family.

She read with avidity the accounts of the gatherings at the palace; she
was up in the court etiquette as much as any gentleman-in-waiting; she
knew how the royal hand should be kissed; when it was necessary to speak
in the presence of royalty, and how one ought to withdraw; and she was
versed in the name and biography of every member of the royal family and
every member of the court. The novels she read, and the conversation of
the quondam lady-in-waiting of the queen who had come to take the baths
in Sarrio, filled her mind with silly ambitions, and imbued her with a
strong desire to live in the brilliant atmosphere of the court.

The majesty of royalty moved and inspired her, who had ever been
incapable of submission, with humility, and the brilliant life at court
suggested to her all the enchantment of a pleasant dream. When she went
to Madrid her position as a mere rich provincial had only admitted her
to the enjoyment of the theatres, drives in the Castellana, visits to
the shops, and walks in the streets; but the court with all its gaieties
and delights was still as far removed as if she had remained in Sarrio.
Nevertheless, she was quite certain, and not without reason, that she
could have been a star in those exalted spheres; that her beauty, her
vivacity, and her charming ways would have brought her into note in the
most distinguished society. Sometimes, when driving in a landau with her
husband, she had seen the eyes of the Duke of S--fixed upon her in
flattering admiration, and she received the same notice from the Marquis
of C--, and also from several eminent political people.

On one occasion she heard the Duchess of Medinaceli say to her companion
as she drove past:

"Is that pretty girl just married?"

A poetic vision had remained to her of those three months in Madrid, a
confused recollection of its pleasures, and a distinct desire to emulate
the fashions of the smart ladies of the court with the poor means at
her disposal in the little town of Sarrio. So on her return, whenever
she went out, which was very seldom, she did so in a carriage,
especially if it were to the theatre. It excited some surprise and no
little grumbling in the town when the carriage was first seen waiting
for her at the end of the performance.

The dresses in which she appeared in public were always fantastic, and
utterly different from those worn by the other ladies of the place. They
generally went about their homes with their old clothes "done up
somehow," as they expressed it. But Ventura created a revolution in this
direction; she attired herself in the morning in new and pretty
garments. She was never seen, even in the retirement of her boudoir,
without being well turned out; and her silk morning-gown, her
hair-nets--things hitherto unknown in Sarrio--and her velvet slippers
were the admiration of the town.

Many ladies called upon her for the sole purpose of seeing her beautiful
things.

When Gonzalo saw her absorbed in the perusal of society papers, and
heard her describe some court ball as if she had been present, he would
exclaim, laughing:

"Do you know how this mania of yours would be defined by the medical
faculty? 'Grandeur mad.'"

This offended her, because, like all mocking creatures, she was deeply
wounded by ridicule leveled at herself.

The young man sometimes laughed with his sister-in-law at his wife's
eccentricities, and at other times he became quite angry with her
conduct, which he termed stupid and shallow; but Cecilia tried to
appease him by reminding him of the youth and the impressibleness of
Ventura.

"You will see," she said; "in a few months' time she will have given up
all such nonsense."

Cecilia was his safety-valve, the confidante of all his matrimonial
troubles, and he never failed to receive from her some useful advice or
some consoling words that calmed his splenetic outbursts. He became so
accustomed to these confidences that, if his sister-in-law were not at
home after any difference he had with Ventura, he would put on his hat
and run in search of her to the Promenade, to church, or wherever she
might be.

The many hours that they spent together also favored these confidences.
Ventura did not like going out, and as Don Rufo ordered the child fresh
air, Cecilia undertook to accompany the nurse, and Gonzalo also joined
the walks. The nurse with the baby went first, and the young man
followed with Cecilia. It was during these long walks that he confided
to her all his secrets, all his hopes and fears and joys. Sometimes when
hearing her speak with so much perspicacity on serious matters, he
exclaimed, with a want of gallantry to his wife: "What a pity Ventura
has not your clever, sensible disposition!"

She, on the other hand, was as impenetrable to him as to everybody else.
Whether it was because she had no secrets to tell, or whether it was due
to her excessively reserved disposition, the fact remained that the
eldest daughter of Belinchon carefully avoided talking of herself.
Neither her joys nor her troubles were confided to anybody, and only a
very sharp observer could have detected the emotions that moved her; and
Gonzalo, in the simple egotism of a strong and healthy man incapable of
much perspicacity, simply looked upon his sister-in-law as a passive,
rational, cold being, admirable for giving advice and managing others,
but incapable of feeling those rages, those joys, those insensate
passions that assail weak natures like his own.

Nevertheless, he tried sometimes, in a joking way, to win her
confidence. He knew that three or four young men in the town aspired to
her hand, for he had come upon one or two walking up and down in front
of the house, and in the theatre he had noticed them turning their
opera-glasses in her direction; and although Gonzalo was somewhat
disgusted at seeing that the attention was due more to the attraction of
her money than to love, he tried to flatter her by alluding to her
admirers.

She received the remarks in stony silence, with an absent sort of smile
to conceal her thoughts, until she found herself obliged to turn the
conversation.

But on one occasion Gonzalo treated the subject with more seriousness
and greater pertinacity than usual.

A friend of his boyhood, an engineer, had spoken to him of Cecilia, and
begged him to do his best to interest her on his behalf. The young man
was very much pleased with the frank, open way in which his friend spoke
on the matter.

"Gonzalo," he said, "I am now at an age and in a position to marry. I
did not care about doing so either in Madrid or in Seville, because I
mistrust women I have not known for some time. Men ought to marry in
their own neighborhood girls they have seen grow up round about them. I
determined to marry one of the girls here, and I have set my heart upon
your sister-in-law. I will now confide to you my ideas about her:
Cecilia is neither pretty nor ugly; she is a passable woman, and I have
always thought that such a one makes the best wife. In the four or five
times I have met her at the Saldanas I found her very friendly,
reasonable, frank, and modest. Her girl friends all speak well of her,
which fact men don't take sufficiently into account when they are
thinking of marriage, for girls are implacable, and bear eternal
grudges against each other. Besides, your sister-in-law will have a nice
fortune shortly. I don't see why I should not mention it, because it is
another fact which should be borne in mind. I don't see why men should
systematically marry poor women. Marriage increases a man's expenses;
children cause a considerable outlay; and all these things have to be
taken into account. But I have no need to marry for fortune. I have
rather a lucrative profession, and my parents will leave me some money.
Will you ask her if she has found me to her taste the few times I have
talked with her, and if she will allow me to call on her?"

Gonzalo promised to use his influence on his behalf, while he could not
help prophesying success to his friend's designs, for he was conscious
of the influence he exercised over his sister-in-law, and she had never
hitherto neglected any of his wishes.

"If I am not able to bring it about, nobody can," he added in a burst of
spontaneous confidence and pride. So that same evening, when Cecilia
came to light his lamp in his study, he said to her with a smile:

"Are you busy now, Cecilia? No. Then sit down a minute, I have something
to say to you."

The girl looked at him with her large, luminous, soft eyes full of
surprise. Gonzalo made her take a seat.

"Have you a lover?" he asked bruskly.

"What a question!" she exclaimed, with a face smiling and unabashed.

"I am not speaking of a formal lover. If you had one I should have been
told. I only want to know whether, among the young men who pay attention
to you, any one has succeeded in finding favor with you."

"Why do you want to know?"

"Answer."

Cecilia made a negative gesture.

"Then I am going to take the liberty of speaking to you on behalf of one
who has appealed to me. I mean my friend, Paco Flores, whom you know. He
has begged me to intercede for him, and to ask you if you have found him
objectionable the few times he has talked with you."

"Objectionable?" she asked in surprise. "Why? I do not dislike anybody
as long as they behave well."

"Then he asked me if you would consent to his calling here."

"That is another matter," she returned, suddenly becoming serious. "I
can not hinder his calling here, but if my consent thereto implies my
liking his visits, I am not disposed to give it."

"It is not a question of your accepting him as a bridegroom," Gonzalo
quickly said; "he only wants you to give him a little time, and then if
you consider him worthy of your hand you can take him, and if not, you
can refuse him."

"Well, it is refused now, and without need of any further talk,"
returned the girl with firmness.

"That is very sudden," said Gonzalo, smiling to conceal his vexation at
her brusk refusal.

"It seems to me that in these matters the sincerer we are, the better it
is for all parties. Why should this young man trouble himself to visit
here for some time only to receive the answer that I can give him
to-day?"

"Well, well, let us proceed calmly. If Paco is not antipathetic to you,
as you say, you can not be sure that you may not fall in love with him
by the end of six or eight months or a year."

"I am incapable of falling in love," she said, with a bitter smile that
was incomprehensible to her brother-in-law.

"Love comes when least expected," Gonzalo observed sententiously. "We
may go years and years without it, and then one day, paf! the heart
gives a bound, because we have met our other half."

These words, so simple and yet so cruel, stirred the gall-like
bitterness of her heart. With her eyes fixed on one of the arms of the
chair in which she was seated, she said, in rapid, hard tones:

"Well, I am certain my heart will never go off, paf! one day."

"Why are you so certain, Cecilia? Women, more than men, are made for the
delights of love and for family life."

Cecilia listened to him in silence; her face was severe, and her eyes
were fixed on space.

The words of her brother-in-law sent a note of desolation through her
heart. Yes, it was true, unfortunately it was all true! When he had
finished the apology for love, he made one for his friend, Paco Flores:
such a nice young fellow, too; so courteous, the son of a good family,
with a brilliant career, etc., etc.

But Cecilia was firm in refusing her consent to his coming to the house.
Then Gonzalo, somewhat vexed at her obstinacy, and wounded in his
self-love for having boasted of his influence with his sister-in-law,
uttered some rather cruel remarks.

"Perhaps he is not grand enough for you! Paco is not rich, but he can
certainly aspire to your hand. There is no better fellow in Sarrio;
nobody can say that the marriage would be an unequal one. Oh, perhaps
you expect a prince of the blood! But take care lest you make a great
mistake, for woman's youth soon passes, and many chances are lost like
this."

The girl listened to her brother-in-law's oration till it was over
without moving a muscle. When it was finished, she quietly rose from her
seat, and quickly left the room. On crossing the passage on the way to
her room two large tears rolled down her cheeks.




CHAPTER XX

DON ROSENDO'S EXAMPLE


After his glorious duel the gallant Belinchon wore the laurels of his
well-earned fame with becoming modesty. There are chroniclers who are
not of this opinion, but then their dissent is grounded upon the
discovery of certain annoyances to which the worthy gentleman subjected
some of the townsfolk, while ignoring the fact that such annoyances did
not take place simultaneously with the reported duel, but some time
later.

Chronology is always an important element of history, and in this
particular instance it gives a satisfactory explanation of the acts of
our hero. During the first excitement of the event he was accorded the
marks of admiration indisputably due to him; even his enemies regarded
him with respect mingled with admiration when they saw him pass. Then
Don Rosendo, instead of abusing his recognized superiority, as any other
man of less force of character and modesty would have done, preserved
his same stately, quiet demeanor, and walked along the streets as
gravely and unpretentiously as hitherto--a noble example of
magnanimity, which, however, instead of redounding to his credit, only
exposed him to attacks.

The Cabin soon began to make light of the affair, and malignant stress
was laid upon the exaggerated accounts of the backward jumps given by
the founder of "The Light of Sarrio" in the duel. These jokes, of which
it can well be supposed Gabino Maza was the originator, did not stop in
the precincts of the Club, for they soon spread through the whole place,
so that at the end of a few days the majority of the townsfolk smiled
ironically when the duel of honor was mentioned.

Don Rosendo became conscious of this state of things, not only by his
ears, but also by his eyes, for he noticed that the respectful,
courteous glances of his neighbors were gradually exchanged for a rude
sort of behavior, shown in turning their heads away when he approached,
or in ill-suppressed laughter when they passed him in a narrow street.

What was he to do in such a case? Indisputably it was time to lay aside
modesty and make rude fellows feel the dignity of his noble art of
self-defense.

The first sign he gave of the scorn and contempt in which he held his
enemies was to spit upon the ground when any of the party passed him, to
demonstrate his loathing for them. As soon as the reason of this act
dawned upon the faction, the more timid, fearing that lightning might
follow the rain, took care to avoid him; the braver ones, however,
passed him without heeding the scornful act, but they dared not look him
in the face. At the end of some time several took it calmly as a joke,
and said to one another with a laugh:

"I say, I have just met Don Rosendo."

"Well, did he spit at you?"

"I should think he did!"

Thus the Cabin party made fun of our great patrician, and rude practical
jokes were played on him.

In one of these it was arranged that all the members of the Cabin should
pass by him in single file, at a certain distance from each other, which
was such a strain on Don Rosendo's power or desire to spit that his
throat became quite sore and unequal to the continual effort. But Gabino
Maza, who took the whole matter quite seriously, said he would see if
that ox (the word is strong, but it is textual) would dare spit when he
passed. And, in fact, Don Rosendo had always abstained from doing it at
him, as he thought that a certain amount of consideration was due to the
head of the opposite party.

But one evening, when he was carrying his head rather high, being
somewhat excited after reading the account of a certain duel between two
Yankees, it suddenly occurred to him to spit, in a provocative way, as
he came across Gabino Maza, close to the Café de la Marina. Whereupon
Gabino became white with rage, and, seizing him by the wrist, he said,
in a tone of fury:

"Listen to me, you great fool, you shan't spit at me like that; no, not
if you were in the last stage of phthisis, do you hear?"

As a conventional man, well versed in affairs of honor, Don Rosendo said
nothing at the moment, but on the following day he did not leave the
house, as he waited for Maza's challenge, which, happily for him, did
not come.

In spite of everything Don Rosendo's dueling energy excited emulation in
the town. Thanks to our hero, there arose a great taste for the exercise
of arms, and many of the most distinguished townsfolk went in
enthusiastically for the art of fencing.

Not only the staff of "The Light" and the members of the Club practised
the science of Monsieur Lemaire, but the members of the Cabin,
recognizing the importance of the art, established a fencing academy in
a warehouse near by, and put at its head a retired cavalry officer who
had wielded the foil in Madrid. The immediate consequence of this step
was that all the disputes that now arose between the Club and the Cabin
were formally settled with all the ceremonious etiquette of the code of
honor.

Hardly a week went by without the town being excited at the going and
coming of seconds, meetings held in corners of cafés, while the
proceedings were published in "The Light" and in the Lancian papers. But
out of twenty disputes nineteen would end in an amicable agreement,
drawn up and signed by the seconds.

So that, although these affairs of honor were conducted in accordance
with the usual procedure, they involved nothing more serious than the
blow or insult which gave rise to the quarrel.

On rare occasions, when a great deal of feeling was excited, a meeting
was arranged. Delaunay called out Don Rufo for a paragraph in "The
Future" in which it was stated that the doctors did not go the round of
the hospital at the prescribed hours, and some sword-strokes were
interchanged. The printer Folgueras also had an encounter with Marin's
son-in-law for having omitted to bow to him.

In both cases nothing worse than a few sword-cuts was administered.

The most noteworthy affair was that between Don Rudesindo and Don Pedro
Miranda, who, after vacillating for some time, finally joined the Cabin
party.

The origin of the quarrel was the slaughter-house problem, the occasion
the following: Don Pedro was heard one day to say that Don Rudesindo
only remained on Belinchon's side because he did not want the
slaughter-house built on the Plaza de las Meanas, as it would affect his
house property there.

The cider manufacturer, hearing of this remark, spoke insultingly of Don
Pedro at the Club, and appeared exceedingly angry at the imputation,
although, in fact, he was not so much so as he pretended to be.

Alvaro Peña, who was never so happy as when he had a duel on hand,
hastened to say in a loud voice, with his characteristic arrogance:

"Look out, Don Rudesindo, Miranda must give you satisfaction. Would you
like to leave it to me to settle?"

The good manufacturer felt as if he would willingly have eaten the words
he had let drop, but Peña was such an impetuous fellow. Why the devil
had he said he would like to kick Don Pedro downstairs, when, in truth,
he had just met him as he was leaving home, and had passed him without
uttering a word! But more than twenty people were now present, and he
was in the wretched position of being obliged to reply to the officer in
the least aggressive tone he could command:

"Very well, you may do so if you think it is worth the trouble."

"But it is not a case of worth. Do you think you are only on our side to
be exposed to such low remarks? Why, they are an insult to you. I say,
Don Feliciano, a word with you."

Don Feliciano and he then conferred together in a corner for a few short
minutes, and then sallied forth into the street. Don Rudesindo remained
apparently calm, but inwardly much incensed against Peña, against the
Club, against himself, and against the mother who bore him. What
necessity was there for him to embroil himself, a married man with
children, whose whole life had been spent in working like a slave to
amass a little capital? And now that he had got it--for this fellow's
humbug--it was a fine thing! And the manufacturer could hardly swallow
the sips of cognac with which he was regaling himself.

The affair was quickly arranged. Don Pedro Miranda was quite taken aback
at the visit of Peña and Don Feliciano. He said that he had no
recollection--that he had no spite whatsoever against Don Rudesindo, on
the contrary--But Peña interrupted him by saying:

"Very well, Don Pedro, we can't listen to all that. Just name two
friends, who will arrange with us."

The poor proprietor suggested Gabino Maza and Delaunay, and as one of
these was a choleric, fiery man, and the other a bad-hearted fellow, no
pacification was possible. All explanations were refused. The duel was
arranged to take place in the early morning, and swords were the
weapons to be used.

When Don Rudesindo heard it, he cursed the day he saw the light, and his
adversary threw himself onto a sofa and asked for a cup of lime juice.
However, there was nothing to be done but to obey the call of honor, and
we dare not say whether they were impelled thereto by their own free
will or by extraneous circumstances.

At six in the morning Peña and Don Feliciano on one side, and Maza and
Delaunay on the other, dragged them from their homes to the old
cemetery. What lugubrious fancies passed through Don Pedro Miranda's
head as he journeyed thither! They were only comparable to those that
assailed Don Rudesindo on the same journey. Before arriving, Peña said
to him:

"I am quite sure, Don Rudesindo, that you will settle him, and I feel
primed with courage. Don't push yourself, but you have a difficult part
to play, very difficult!"

The manufacturer would have sacrificed all his property at that moment
to have found it not only difficult but impossible.

"Don Pedro is not firm on his legs; besides, he is short in the arm.
But, as you know, in fighting there is nothing certain, and it is always
the unexpected that happens. If you have any last requests to make, make
them before we arrive."

Don Rudesindo shuddered. He remained silent for some time as he walked
along, and finally, drawing some papers from his pocket, he gave them to
his friend, saying in a stifled voice:

"If I perish give these to Señor Benito."

Two tears then gathered in his eyes.

"Do you mean Señor Benito the Rat?" asked Peña.

Don Rudesindo did not hear him. He had walked quickly on to hide his
emotion. Why the name of his clerk should upset him so much at that
moment we can not explain. Perhaps in the great crises of life we are
suddenly apprised of the existence of strong, deep feelings hitherto
unsuspected.

The old cemetery, to be put in order a short time later, was then
overrun with grass and briers.

The wooden crosses had rotted away, and the only evidence of its being
the home of the dead lay in the two skulls encrusted in the wall on
either side of the gate.

These skulls were certainly not conducive to raising Don Rudesindo's
spirits. We do not know about Don Pedro, but we suspect that the effect
was no more pleasant upon him.

Some time was spent in finding a convenient spot, as the nettles and
briers rendered it impossible for the combatants to take their places.

While Peña and the seconds of the other side busied themselves about
this most solemn task, good Don Feliciano Gomez committed the
indiscretion (God bless him for it!) of going up to Don Pedro Miranda,
who, with his white face, frightened eyes, and his inside upset by the
fabulous amount of lime juice he had imbibed that night, was leaning
against the wall, waiting for the seconds to finish their task, and
looking like a criminal condemned to death.

"Hello, Don Pedro! Cold, eh? Caramba! what a morning! Look here; fancy a
man leaving his bed for this! Goodness gracious! [_Silence, interrupted
by a few groans from the unhappy Miranda._] I would have given my little
finger, not to have had to assist at such an atrocity! But they say it
was a favor that can not be refused. Well, I suppose it can not when it
is a matter of a serious offense. But what is the serious offense in
this case? Come, let us see, let us hear. What is it? Would to God!
would to God! [_Fresh silence and fresh groans from Don Pedro, who
finished by dropping his head resignedly upon his breast as if he were
putting it upon the block._] How much better it would be to be in bed
taking chocolate, eh, my boy?" continued Don Feliciano, putting his hand
upon his shoulder with great familiarity. To this remark Miranda uttered
an almost inaudible guttural sound of assent.

"Yes, I should think so," said the merchant. "For whatever they say, I
can not believe that you want to kill Don Rudesindo, a neighbor who has
been your friend up to a little while ago, who has grown up with you and
went to school with you."

"I do not want--at all," murmured Don Pedro, as if his head were still
upon the block.

"That's right!" exclaimed Don Feliciano, giving him a hearty slap on the
shoulder. "I said so, and Don Rudesindo feels the same. Then who wants
to kill whom? Come, let us hear." And he cast his eyes around, seeking
for an answer to his question.

Peña, Maza, and Delaunay were at some distance, hidden among the
cypresses. Don Rudesindo, also leaning against the wall, was about fifty
paces off.

Then the merchant, filled by a sudden and heavenly inspiration, made a
sign for him to approach.

Don Rudesindo came slowly toward him with a timid, hesitating step.

"Tell me, dear fellow, have you any desire to kill Don Rudesindo?" asked
the merchant of Miranda.

"None whatever," he murmured.

"Have you any wish to wound him?"

"Hardly. I have always esteemed Don Rudesindo," stammered the man of
property.

"Eh? What? What do you say?" cried Don Feliciano in a tone of triumph.
"That you have always esteemed Don Rudesindo? Eh, my dear fellow? You
said so?"

"Yes, señor."

"Tell me, Don Rudesindo" (taking a few steps toward the cider
manufacturer), "do you wish to kill Don Pedro, a neighbor who has
hitherto been your friend, who has grown up with you, and who went with
you to Don Martia's school?"

"I? Why should I?" said the merchant, opening his eyes wide in distress.

"Would you wish to wound him?"

"No, nor do him the least harm. I have always considered him a real
friend."

"How is this, eh? A real friend, eh? Then, in my humble opinion, I think
you ought both to embrace each other."

Hardly had Don Feliciano uttered these words than Miranda and Don
Rudesindo, by a simultaneous impulse, rushed into each other's arms, and
embraced with such effusion that the bones in their bodies were all but
broken.

Don Feliciano at the same time bared his bald, retreating forehead, and,
waving his hat wildly for some minutes, he shouted:

"Hurrah!"

I do not know to whom this hurrah was addressed if not to the astute
spirit to whom he owed his brilliant idea.

At that moment the seconds approached and gazed with surprise at what
was going on.

They tried to look pleased at the turn the affair had taken, and soon
went their different ways. But that evening at the Club Peña sharply
reprimanded Don Feliciano for his conduct, going so far as to say that
he had put him in a ridiculous position, and that, did he not look upon
him as a friend of long standing and older than himself, he would ask
satisfaction.

"Satisfaction?" exclaimed the optimistic Don Feliciano. "What next will
you ask, you exacting creature?"

"Would you refuse to fight me?" asked the officer in a ringing voice.

"What should we fight about?"

"What you like."

"I for dancing a fandango or a bolero, my dear fellow," he returned, as
he proceeded to dance up and down the room, and snap his fingers until
his hat fell off and exposed his bald head to view.

The members of the Club rolled on the sofas with laughter, and Peña,
after giving vent to some contemptuous remarks, retired from the scene
in vexation and disgust.




CHAPTER XXI

OUR ESTEEMED CONTEMPORARY


Constantly attacked in "The Light," the worthies of the Cabin finally
decided to start another paper, in which they could avenge the
injustices to which they had been exposed.

This entailed an enormous sacrifice, because very few among them were
rich. The only one that could be called so was Don Pedro Miranda, and he
would rather have a tooth drawn than loosen his purse-strings.

By dint of meetings, touting, asking help from different quarters, and
making collections at the Cabin, they ended by getting the requisite sum
of money for setting up a printing-press, as Folgueras was not willing
to print the publication, nor did they wish to humiliate themselves by
asking such a favor. When the printing apparatus, modest as it was, was
all in order, the occasion was celebrated by the indispensable banquet,
at which it was decided to name the new organ "The Youth of Sarrio," and
all its supporters glowed with enthusiasm for its prosperity and with
desire for the destruction of its vile enemies.

The appearance of the first number, bearing a vignette representing a
youth surrounded with rows of books for his perusal and delectation,
caused a great sensation in the town, and it deserved it. The members of
the Cabin, who had been powerless to resent the insults heaped upon them
by "The Light" for many months, now avenged themselves with interest.
Santo Cristo de Rodillero, what a stream of insults and attacks! From
the beginning to the end it was full of caustic attacks on the members
of the Club. They did not openly call one a rogue, another a villain,
another a brute, another a humbug, and so forth, but they spoke of them
under names by which no one could fail to recognize them. Belinchon was
called "Don Quixote," and Don Rudesindo "Sancho," Sinforoso the "Marquis
of Kicks," and Peña "Captain Choleric," etc. And shielded thus, they
attacked them in a most merciless fashion, and did not leave them a leg
to stand on.

Sticks were used at night on the Rua Nueva. Folgueras, who had also his
share of insults in "The Youth of Sarrio," met Gabino Maza and leveled a
blow at his head, which Maza returned with interest, and Folgueras
renewed the attack, for a compositor came to his assistance, and his
opponent was seconded by his son-in-law, which made the brawl look quite
alarming.

"The Youth of Sarrio" was published every Sunday. Periquito Miranda was
glad of an outlet for his poetic vein, as his father's quarrel with the
Club had arrested the demand for his effusions in that quarter; but it
now overflowed in numberless sonnets, odes, acrostics, and other
metrical combinations which bore witness to his platonic love for the
wife of the manager of the steel factory, a great, elephantine, stout
Frenchwoman who could easily have put him in her pocket. But we know
that Periquito had a predilection for ponderous, portly specimens of
womankind. He found that the form of _dreams_ was his best mode of
expressing the feelings which assailed and tormented his soul. The
platonic youth dreamed in verse that he was in a lovely grotto, where a
nymph with waving arms invited him to repose upon a couch of roses and
green grasses. Another time he was on the summit of a very high
mountain, when on the billowy clouds in the distant horizon a form of a
woman (the wife of the manager) took shape; the clouds approached, the
woman was white as driven snow, glorious and splendid as a magnolia
flower, and the beautiful apparition finally came toward him and bore
him off to azure space, encircled in her arms. Another time he was
sailing in a little ship on the ocean waves. The ship foundered, and he
descended to the briny depths to be welcomed by a fair and most
beautiful nymph (always the wife of the manager), who took him by the
hand, led him to a magnificent crystal palace, seated him at her side on
a marble throne, and invited him to the nuptial ceremony to the strains
of sweet music, after which she escorted him to an apartment which was a
marvel of decoration.

These dreams of bliss, put into facile verse yet adorned with a certain
poetic gravity, caused some anxiety among the paterfamiliases. Periquito
daily ate more and grew thinner.

"The Light" of the following Thursday, after loading the chief members
of the Cabin with insults, attacked the poet under the malicious,
satirical pseudonym of Pericles.

A fierce and incessant warfare thus arose between "The Light" and "The
Youth of Sarrio," and the columns of both papers were filled with mutual
insults and recriminations.

It seldom happened that a number of either of the publications appeared
without giving rise to some blows or a brawl, if not to a formal duel.
Nevertheless, they became more chary in this respect. It was an easy
matter to be a second for any contending parties, but to use a sword or
pistol on one's own behalf was another matter. The spirit of controversy
inflamed the minds of the townsfolk; many people who had remained
indifferent in the disputes between the Club and the Cabin ended by
joining one side or the other, in some cases because they took up the
cudgels on behalf of their relations, and in other cases merely because
the dispute aroused a kindred feeling in their bellicose temperaments.

The place was soon divided into two parties. The side which boasted of
Don Rosendo as its worthy chief was the most numerous, and it consisted
of almost all the rich merchants of Sarrio. That of the Cabin was
smaller, numbering the landowners and the timorous religious people who
had been scandalized by "The Light."

The dissension increased to such a degree that in a short time those
that belonged to one side totally ignored those of the opposite party,
although they had been good friends hitherto.

"The Light" and "The Youth of Sarrio" began to criticize each other's
style and grammar, eagerly seizing upon any mistakes of syntax, and
finding as much fault with the diction as with the verbs.

"This word is not Castilian," said "The Youth of Sarrio."

"The word _desilusionar_, which the pettifoggers of 'The Youth of
Sarrio' say is not Castilian," returned "The Light," "we have seen used
by the most eminent writers of Madrid, such as Ferez, Gonzalez,
Martinez, etc. This time, as usual, the organ of the Cabin has
overreached itself."

"The Youth" replied to this remark, "The Light" retorted; instances from
the grammar, dictionary, and distinguished authors were quoted, and at
last nobody knew what to think.

"The Youth of Sarrio" was condemned for using the preposition _de_ after
_debia_ when referring to the Calle de Atras requiring to be repaired.

"A _de_ too much, dear student."

"But when the verb is used conditionally," returned "The Youth," "the
_de_ is required. Have the editors of 'The Light' been to school, or
not?"

"We have been to school," was the reply, "to greater purpose, as it
seems, than all the fools of the Cabin, and we know that in the present
case the verb _deber_ is not used conditionally."

"Yes, it is." "No, it is not." And things went on as before, although
sometimes they spoke of referring the questions to the Academy of
Language. "Don Juan Tenorio," by Zorilla, was often quoted, and
citations from "El Curioso Parlante" were brought to bear on the
questions at issue.

This grammatical controversy drove people to the study of a science of
which they had hitherto been ignorant. The effect was the same at both
the Club and the Cabin, and two or three copies of the latest grammar of
the Academy were constantly in request.

The most venomous of the linguistic attacks were those directed against
Don Rosendo, whom it was considered expedient to crush in respect of his
being the head and soul of his party. Belinchon had never studied
grammar, except in his childhood, but like all superior spirits, if he
did not know it he divined it. His opponents were constantly bringing to
light a thousand anachronisms in his articles, but such was the
confidence with which his powerful mind inspired them that they never
credited these remarks, and only regarded them as pure calumnies. If
there had been no grammar, Belinchon, with all his natural gifts, would
have been capable of inventing one. Nobody was a greater master than he
of the language of the press, bright and brilliant, full of phrases made
sacred by the use of a hundred writers.

Thanks to his wonderful style, Don Rosendo could write an article on the
liberty of culture with the same facility as he could pen an informal
account of the fishing industry.

His enemies said that he used Gallicisms. And what if he did? The mere
fact of a writer of such repute using them converted them into the
purest Castilian.

This anxiety to show up the Gallicisms of "The Light" was one of the
manias of "The Youth of Sarrio," or "The Local Student," as it was
always called by the other publication, anxious to show the withering
contempt it had for it by not even giving it its proper name. By the use
of a certain old dictionary in the possession of one of the members of
the Cabin they were merciless in their attacks on the articles and the
novelettes in "The Light." If Don Rosendo said in courteous language
that for want of _conveniancias_ he could not touch upon certain
subjects, "The Youth" called him to book in a sarcastic style. Where did
the clever Don Quixote (as they almost always called Belinchon) learn
this use of the word _conveniencia_? It was certainly not in the famous
history written by Cervantes. If he used the word _gubernamental_ or
_banal_, or the phrase _Tener lugar_, what bursts of derision from "The
Youth of Sarrio"! What mockery! What scorn! This lasted until the Club
got hold of another dictionary of Gallicisms, and then both papers
became so involved on the subject that they ended by ignoring purism,
and returning to their free, happy, independent style.

Moreover, the controversy had become so heated that classic terms were
insufficient for the conveyance of their insults.

In all the articles such terms as "venomous reptile," "despicable
creatures," "obtuse brains," "wallowing in the mire," "ignoble and
degraded beings," were adopted on both sides.

Tired of insulting each other, they proceeded to lead the attack into
the family life, and modest wives and venerable fathers were soon not
safe from the shafts. "The Youth of Sarrio" was the first to start in
that quarter by publishing an Arab story called "The Eastern Slave," in
which form an exact relation was given of the history of Doña Paula and
her marriage with Don Rosendo (Mahomad Zegri), flavored with low-toned
remarks and shameful insinuations. Belinchon felt inclined to call the
staff out, but thinking it would only add fuel to the fire and look as
if the cap fitted him, he decided to confine his revenge to the organ of
the press.

Sinforoso, at his request, then wrote an Indian story, in which the life
and shady doings of Maza's father figured, for he had been a
slave-owner, and had made his fortune in trafficking in human flesh.
Henceforth Eastern stories were freely told on both sides as instruments
for laying bare the peccadillos of either party.

The widest field for strife, and the richest in results for both the
Club and the Cabin, was that of politics. The eyes of both parties
turned in that direction, and no opportunities were lost for skirmishes
and conquests. Until this division in the town, politics, as we know,
had played but a small part in Sarrio. But from that time it became the
constant subject, the indispensable element of all masculine
conversation.

No one had hitherto thought of referring to Rojas Salcedo on the subject
of the mayor's reelection, because Don Roque was the friend of
everybody, and had represented the district for eighteen years.
Nevertheless, as the time of the municipal elections drew near, letters
were sent from both parties on the matter.

It must be mentioned that the members of the Club wished at all cost to
have Don Roque deposed from the municipal chair, because on more than
one occasion, in the exercise of his duties, he had sided with the
opposite party at the expense of his old friends.

"The Light" repudiated him on this account. The enmity increased. Don
Roque in revenge abused his authority by sending Folgueras to prison,
and the attacks of "The Light" proceeded with redoubled fury. Don Roque
being now regarded as a tyrant of the Middle Ages, began to fear for his
life, and went about night and day accompanied by the veteran Marcones.

It was said that his death was decreed at a secret meeting of the
members of the Club, so the hair of the poor mayor stood on end with
terror if he espied any of "The Light" party in a lonely quarter, and he
promptly turned his steps in an opposite direction.

Rojas Salcedo replied to the members of the Cabin that if Don Roque were
elected councilor he would be reelected mayor. At the same time he
secretly wrote to the members of the Club, charging them to do their
best to prevent his being elected, and in this way he sided with both
parties.

But the partizans of Belinchon triumphed all along the line by reason of
their numbers, their riches, and their open-handedness. The struggle was
finally concentrated on the matter of Don Roque. The members of the
Cabin knew that if he were elected the battle would be won, because he
would be mayor, and the power of that office would outweigh any other
influence in the corporation. The Club was also quite alive to the fact,
so both sides fought with the fiercest zeal. At last the old mayor was
defeated at the election by a small number of votes. Confused and cast
down, his eyes terribly inflamed and his face so livid that it was
fearful to see, he finally retired home after spending the whole day at
the Town Hall. A king robbed of his crown could not have felt the blow
more keenly. He arrived at his house without an escort, like any
ordinary being. He had seen Marcones in the corridor, and he was certain
Marcones had seen him, but he had not ventured to ask him to accompany
him home, as the old official was standing talking obsequiously to Don
Rufo, his enemy, and pretended not to see his old chief pass by. It was
not that Marcones turned to the rising sun, but, imbued with the
principle of modern statesmanship, he understood that the public force
ought always to be at the service of the reigning power.

And yet it was really more necessary for Don Roque to be escorted home
than it had hitherto been. Besides suffering from a shock that went to
his heart, he felt physically indisposed. These long hours of agony,
suspense, receiving contradictory reports at every minute, on no
nourishment but drops of gin since the morning, had worked a dreadful
change in him. His legs shook and his sight failed. To reach his home he
had to support himself several times against the wall. On his arrival at
the door the old servant who opened it started back aghast, the face of
her master looked as if his throat was being squeezed by pitiless,
invisible hands. Although she was always able to interpret the confused,
indistinguishable sounds that issued from his mouth, she could not
understand a word he said on this occasion. Seeing him go straight to
his room, she took him a glass and some water. But Don Roque in a fury
dashed the glass to the ground, and roared like a person possessed with
the devil. However, it was impossible to understand what those hollow,
fearful, demoniacal sounds meant which rose to his mouth, and before
issuing forth resounded four or five times in the enormous cavities of
his throat. Trembling and alarmed, she ran to fetch a bottle of wine.
Although somewhat appeased, he declined to take it, and he repeated with
greater emphasis, but with no more clearness, the order that he had
given. At last, by dint of sharpening her wits, the servant managed to
understand that her master wanted some rum punch. Don Roque, seeing that
she had understood him, became calm; he took off the enormous greatcoat
in which he was enveloped, then his frock coat, then tried to take off
his boots; his noble municipal countenance assumed the color of
Valdepeñas wine, but he could not bring the undertaking to a
satisfactory conclusion, so when the servant came with the punch she
completed it for him.

Then he said he was going to bed, and the doors were to be well locked,
and he was not to be disturbed on any pretext whatsoever. The servant
did not understand a word of this discourse, but divining the purport,
she withdrew.

Don Roque then threw himself on to his bed, drew the clothes up, and
with his back against the pillows, he took the glass of punch and put it
to his lips. On discovering that there was a deficiency in one of the
ingredients, he uttered a guttural, awful sound, and rising from the
bed, he fetched the bottle of rum from his cupboard and put it on the
little table by the bedside.

Then once more in bed, he gravely and solemnly proceeded, with the glass
in one hand and the bottle in the other, to repair the servant's error.
He took a sip of punch and then filled up the glass from the bottle, and
the concoction thus strengthened was more befitting the state of
agitation which possessed his mind, for under that apparent calm Don
Roque's brain was wild with excitement. All the hours of the day passed
before him in their sad and depressing course--the deceptions he had
endured, the disappointed hopes, the heated discussions, and finally the
desertion of Marcones.

And then the future. That was of the blackest description. Was he to
resign the mayor's mace that he had wielded with glory so many years, to
turn into a nobody without an escort, a private person, not to have the
run of the Town Hall, not to pass by any of the corporation officials,
and not to be able to say: "Juan, go to Rabila well, and don't let the
servants be cleaning their pails there"?

If he saw a stonebreaker in the road, was he not to have the power of
telling him to strike harder or gentler, to raise the ax less or more?

His feet were intensely cold. He got up two or three times to put the
clothes thicker over them, but his efforts were fruitless. The contents
of the bottle finally passed to the glass, and from the glass to his
stomach. A pleasant heat then pervaded his inside and gradually
permeated through all his members. Don Roque then felt his tongue
loosen, and he began to talk to himself, very distinctly in his own
opinion, but if any mortals had been in earshot they would have
retreated in horror.

Sounds like all, call, mall seemed to figure most frequently in the
monologue, from which a perspicacious philologue, taking into account
the combination of the vowel _a_ and the consonant _l_, would have
deduced the probability that the word expressed by the mayor was rascal,
and this would have been a more or less legitimate deduction.

At last he was silent. He felt a fiery heat in his throat, which passed
to his head and face. His tongue declined to move. He experienced a
sensation of physical increase of his whole being; his head especially
seemed to grow; it grew in such a measureless way that it overpowered
him.

At the same time the objects about him--the cupboard, bed, washstand,
and the sticks standing in the corner--appeared to grow small. He seemed
to hear in his head the noise of the machinery of a clock in motion, a
wheel that went round swiftly, and a hammer that fell rhythmically with
a metallic sound. The hammer ceased and the wheel went on.

He thought he heard strange noises in the street that petrified him with
fear. Poor Don Roque did not know that his enemies were at that moment
treating him to "rough music." He thought of calling the servant, but
feared that the sounds were imaginary, as they had been before. And, in
fact, he was confirmed in this idea by hearing a deafening clang of
bells, a discordant sound in which all seemed mingled, from the largest
bell of Toledo to the smallest hand-bell.

How bewildering! how fatiguing! Fortunately it ceased with a final loud
clang, but it was immediately succeeded by a whistle so long and so
sharp that it seemed it must break his tympanum, and he instinctively
raised his hands to his ears. On the cessation of the whistle he thought
that the foot of the bed went up and the head went down, until his feet
were above his head, which was a most agonizing sensation. He then gave
a long sigh, and his feet returned to their normal level; but as the
same proceeding was repeated several times, he had to give repeated long
sighs to regain his normal position.

But that fantastic operation did not warm Don Roque's feet. They were
like two pieces of ice, while the rest of his body was burning hot. His
head especially rose to a fearful temperature that increased every
minute. When he raised his hand to his forehead it seemed like a flame,
and he seemed to hear the voice of his wife, who died twenty years ago,
calling, "Roque! Roque! Roque!" The teeth of the mayor chattered with
terror. He lost sight of the cupboard, the walls of the bedroom, and the
objects about him, and saw in their place a million lights of all colors
that were at first motionless and then began to dance violently. By dint
of crossing and recrossing each other they formed solid circles--one
blue, one red, one violet--that danced around him and became more
striking than the solar spectrum. At last the circles also disappeared,
leaving one single, luminous, hardly perceptible point. But that point
slowly increased; it was first a star, then a moon, then an enormous sun
that grew gradually larger as it assumed a blood-red hue. This sun
increased and increased until its immense disk grew to the size of an
ox, then it partially overshadowed him, then it covered him completely,
and then he suddenly knew no more. And the good mayor, indeed, saw no
more, for in the morning he was found dead, with his head fallen
forward, a case of apoplectic seizure.




CHAPTER XXII

LOCAL POLITICS


Señor Anselmo, the conductor of the band of Sarrio, came to tell the
President of the Academy that the mayor threatened to stop the orchestra
supplies if it attended St. Anthony's fair that afternoon.

"How is that?" asked Don Mateo, raising himself up in bed, where he
still was, and stretching out his hand for his spectacles on a little
table by his side. "Stop supplies! Why should he stop the supplies?"

"I don't know. Prospero has just sent to tell me so."

"What has the band's going to St. Anthony's fair to do with him?" he
returned in a tone of irritation.

"I think it is because a gentleman is arriving to-day at Don Rosendo's,
and as the fair will block the road--"

"Ah, yes, the Duke of Tornos; but what has that to do with it? Come,
they are mad--Look here, leave me an instant. I am going to dress, and
then I will go and see Maza. I dare say we shall be able to arrange
matters. Leave me."

Señor Anselmo left the room, and quicker than could have been expected
from his years and infirmities, Don Mateo appeared, ready to go out. His
wife and his daughter were, as usual, at church. He asked for some
breakfast.

"I can not give it to you, sir. The señora has the keys, and there is no
chocolate out."

"Always the same!" grumbled the old man, not so vexed as he ought to
have been. "I don't know why she can't leave out what is necessary. It
is true that I generally get up late, but there may be cases of
important business, like to-day."

"Shall I go and ask for an ounce of chocolate from a neighbor?"

"No, there is no need. I am sure Matilda would be vexed. Is there
nothing to eat handy?"

The servant did not answer for some seconds.

"No, señor; there is nothing. You know that the señora----"

"Yes, yes, I know."

Don Mateo went to the sideboard and began pulling open the drawers.
Nothing--there was nothing but the table utensils: spoons, forks,
corkscrew, etc.; but some chocolate drops and a plate of biscuits could
be seen through the glass cupboard door.

"Caramba! if there were only a key," and drawing out his own bunch he
proceeded to try the lock with each key on the ring, but his efforts
were fruitless. At last in despair he readjusted his spectacles, put on
his hat, and was starting off on his expedition, saying:

"Well, well, we will fast to-day."

But before arriving at the door he turned round and said abruptly to the
maid:

"Is there any bread about?"

"The baker has not come yet, but you can have some of mine," returned
the girl, smiling.

"All right; let me see this bread of yours."

So they repaired to the kitchen, and the servant lifting the lid from
the bread-pan, Don Mateo took out a moderate-sized piece of almost black
rye bread.

"All right; I don't object to your black bread," he said, cutting
himself a piece. "Health to the darkies," he then added, with a
jocoseness he had not ventured to display for years, as he swallowed a
mouthful. The servant smiled, astonished at his good humor.

"It has more flavor than ours. If it were not quite so hard!"

He then brushed away the crumbs with his hand, readjusted his
spectacles, and after taking a draft of water--for the wine was also
locked up--he sallied forth in the direction of the Town Hall. The clock
of the building was striking ten. He passed through the great portico,
mounted the wide, stone staircase, and arriving at the corridor, where
the dust was more than an inch thick, he asked Marcones, who came
forward, for Don Gabino.

"The mayor is sitting."

"Sitting! The deuce he is! At this hour?"

It was, in fact, a rare occurrence. Two years had elapsed since the
death of Don Roque, and those of the Club who then took office at the
Town Hall with Don Rufo as mayor for more than a year and a half were
now reaping the consequences of subsequent defeat. They were still in
the majority in the municipal corporation, but the Cabin party finally
worked so effectually in Madrid that Gabino Maza was elected mayor. It
was said that this was due to the hateful treachery of Rojas Salcedo,
who, noting at the previous municipal elections that the power of the
Cabin party was on the increase, now went over to that side. Thus the
storm of hatred and abuse passed upon him by the supporters of Don
Belinchon was indescribable.

A fierce struggle ensued. Each sitting of the Town Council was a
disgrace. The Maza party sued the ex-corporation for the depreciation of
the funds, demanding reimbursement of the same.

The members of the Belinchon party were quite sure that justice would be
accorded them in the Audience Chamber, but on the principle that God
helps those who help themselves they brought all possible influence to
bear in their favor, and letters went to and from Madrid. The Cabin
party was not, however, remiss in opposition on its side, and Maza made
his opponents feel the force of his rod of power. As Don Rosendo's
majority consisted only of two votes, Gabino spared no pains to rob him
of them. Sometimes he convoked a special meeting when it was impossible
for any one of them to come; at other times he sent false notices to
certain councilors, saying that the session was postponed; at other
times, when a measure was to be put to the vote, he, by common consent
with his friends, made it in such an ambiguous way that it confounded
Don Rosendo's supporters, and as it happened on more than one occasion,
they voted against themselves. Moreover, he once had some councilors
locked in the office and took away the key. After the dignitaries of the
corporation were weary of calling out and hammering at the door, an
official came and opened it, but the voting had taken place without
them.

Thanks to these and other tactics, and countless acts of arbitrariness,
the choleric ex-naval officer achieved his great object of avenging
himself on his enemies. His strategy was chiefly exhibited in attacks
where it hurt the most; that is to say, on their house property. If any
member of the Club owned one or more houses in a street in which no
friend of his own had any property, he ordered the architect of the
corporation to level the road and make it lower, by which course the
foundations of the houses were laid bare and the buildings were in
danger of falling to the ground, to say nothing of the inconvenience of
having to put ladders for ingress. Thus during the few months of his
mayoralty there were more than twenty houses in Sarrio with the
foundations exposed, and at other times he had the roads raised so that
the houses were flooded when it rained.

Such freaks naturally excited a great commotion among Don Belinchon's
partizans. Rabid diatribes appeared in "The Light," and incessant scenes
took place at the municipal sessions. But Maza took it all quite
quietly, and calmly pursued his urban reforms, receiving meanwhile the
complaints of his victims with a cruel smile, and giving fierce,
sarcastic replies to the speeches of the opposite party.

Marcones took Don Mateo into a room adjoining the sessional chamber. The
people's gallery was too small to admit more than one decent-sized
person; and, moreover, the disputes of those fighting cocks were of
little interest to outsiders. The two notaries of the place were in
friendly converse in the same room, Don Victor Varela and Sanjurjo; the
first was a little old man, with prominent eyes and such a coarsely made
wig that it looked like straw, and the other was a man of middle age
with a grayish mustache, afflicted with lameness from his birth. They
greeted our old man like a great friend, and after the manner of people
who see each other every day. Indeed, there was nobody in the town who
could help greeting Don Mateo.

"You are waiting for the meeting to be over, eh?"

"Yes, señor," returned one of the two men, in so abrupt and cold a tone
that the old gentleman felt no desire to pursue the subject further.

He sought for another topic, and hit upon sport as one more congenial to
the tastes of the depositaries of public trust. Both were ardent
sportsmen after quails, woodcock, etc., but their love of coursing was
extreme. Directly any leisure time was at their disposal the swift,
innocent animals were subjected to a fearful martyrdom at the hands of
these notaries of the corporation, actively seconded by half a dozen
greyhounds, kept half starved to quicken their pace.

To talk of hares was next door to heaven to Don Victor; as for Sanjurjo,
to stand up to his waist in brambles and to start one was heaven itself.

"What a pity to lose such a day!" exclaimed Don Victor with a sigh as he
looked through the window covered with dust.

"True," returned Sanjurjo with another sigh, "but I dare say the ground
at Maribona is rather soft; there has been a good deal of rain the last
few days."

"What does that matter?" said Don Mateo. "Now in this summer weather it
soon gets dry, as the ground so readily absorbs the damp."

The lawyers looked at each other in dismay.

"Pépe la Esquila told me," he continued, "that the peasant folk have
seen hares jumping about in Ladreda."

"Yes, we know," said Sanjurjo. "If it were not for some trifle to-day we
should have gone off there," and he gave a sign of intelligence to Don
Victor.

"Well, Pépe is going this morning with Fermo; I heard so yesterday
evening."

The notaries looked at each other in alarm.

"What did I tell you, Sanjurjo?" exclaimed Don Victor.

"Well, I must confess the rogue has taken me in. Never mind, there will
be some left. We will go to-morrow, you and I, Don Victor."

But the news had saddened them, and they preserved an obstinate silence.
Excited voices and loud noises were audible in the chamber, while the
sharp ting of the president's bell was constantly heard calling to
order.

Don Mateo, feeling quite depressed at his inability to sustain the
conversation, made another attempt with Sanjurjo.

"Well, man, I should not have thought you would have cared for sport
with your lame leg."

"What, how? What are you thinking of? He runs like a greyhound,"
exclaimed Don Victor, with affectionate enthusiasm. "Directly he is on
the track of a hare he ceases to be lame. And I say that he invented his
lameness to excite pity. He is no more lame than you or I."

"If you could only make me well," returned Sanjurjo, smiling resignedly.

The joke put them all in good spirits. Don Victor recounted the feats of
his friend on various occasions:

"One day he went on all fours so as to run better. That was a sight."

"What," queried Don Mateo in astonishment, "on all fours?"

"Yes, it is a fact," returned Sanjurjo, laughing, and adding that he had
learned to run like that as a child, when his lameness was more
pronounced, and prevented him being a match for his playfellows. Then
he, on his side, spoke of Don Victor as a lazy fellow, who would scan
every blade of grass to avoid taking an unnecessary step, whereupon Don
Victor joined in the laugh against himself, saying that hares were not
only started with the legs, but with the eyes as well.

"How many times has your obstinacy ended in failure? Do you recollect
that St. Peter's Day three years ago, when you left me alone near
Arceanes? Who started the hare then--you, who went off like the wind,
or I, who remained quietly behind?"

The conversation now became more and more animated, to the great delight
of Don Mateo, who could never bear to see any one look bored in his
presence. When their cheerful talk made them oblivious to the shouts and
ringing of the bell going on in the other room, the door was thrown
open, and the majestic figure of Don Belinchon appeared in a state of
excitement difficult to describe. His hair was disordered, some locks
hanging about his face damp with sweat, his cheeks were aflame, his eyes
glassy, and the bow of his cravat was undone.

"Sanjurjo, Sanjurjo, come here!" he said in a strange voice, without
greeting or even seeing Don Mateo. The notary rose quietly from his
seat, and entered the large room with him. Don Victor made no allusion
to the sudden exit, but continued quietly talking on the same subject
with Don Mateo, who did not dare to ask any questions. At the end of
some time Sanjurjo reappeared, shut the door behind him, took his seat
again, and continued his interrupted conversation.

But not many minutes elapsed before the door was again roughly opened,
and the short, stout form of Don Pedro Miranda appeared in the same
state of excitement as that of the former arrival.

"Don Victor, Don Victor, come here!"

He also neither greeted nor saw Don Mateo.

The notary quietly rose from his seat and followed him.

"What the devil does this mean?" asked Don Mateo of Sanjurjo when the
door was closed.

The only reply was a scornful shrug of the shoulders.

"What foolery!" grumbled Don Mateo. "Belinchon and Miranda never used to
get so excited about these affairs of the corporation, and want to be
mayor!"

Things had indeed changed. The violent party feeling that both sides
brought to bear in every province was in fuller force in the municipal
corporation than anywhere. Maza's tyranny had so infuriated Don
Rosendo's friends that they spared no means to contravene it. They
wished at all costs to bring an action against him for his abuse of
authority. To this end Belinchon had secured the services of the lawyer
Sanjurjo, who constantly attended him at the sittings, and drew up
statements and statements of the arbitrary conduct of the mayor, all of
which were sent to the courts of justice, but there they were blocked,
thanks to the ill-will of the judge.

Then the Cabin party employed the other lawyer, who also drew up
documents complaining of the insubordination of the majority, and of its
carrying resolutions on subjects of which it knew nothing. When the
sitting was over Mateo was taken into the mayor's room. He was found
sipping a refreshing concoction which was considered good for the bile,
but his system was greatly tried by his daily resort to this remedy for
his disorder. He was in an excited, agitated state, for the sardonic
smile and scornful calm adopted at the sittings were merely assumed,
while his very vitals were consumed with rage, which seemed to turn his
blood to gall. What trouble it cost him to repress those wild, blind
outbursts of passion which assailed him at every step!

Two of his friends were discussing the meeting, while he, silent and
livid, with dark circles under his eyes, stirred his concoction with a
spoon. Don Mateo, as one of the very few persons who remained neutral in
Sarrio, was received with frankness and affability.

"Take a seat, Don Mateo. What good news brings you here?"

The old man replied that he came to know if the report were true that
the band would be put down if it attended the St. Anthony fair that
afternoon. The face of Maza darkened. It was quite true that it could no
longer count upon any support from the corporation if the instruments
were taken out that afternoon from the Academy. Don Mateo asked:

"But why?"

After grinding his teeth as a preface to his remark, Maza replied that
he did not wish to celebrate the arrival of a person who was coming that
afternoon on a visit to Belinchon, for, he added: "Don Quixote would be
quite capable of thinking that the band had attended in honor of his
guest."

"But, Gabino, as it has attended every year, nobody could think any such
thing. You must bear in mind that this is the chief fair of the town,
and that it will be very sad for the young people not to have a little
dancing and amusement just then."

"They must do without it to-day. I am very sorry. If the band likes to
go it can go, but it knows what it has to expect."

It was impossible to turn him from his decision. At first Don Mateo used
persuasion, and then he grew angry, and with the privilege of his years
and his unfailing good intentions, which nobody in the town could doubt,
he told Maza and his two councilors present a few home truths, which
neither they nor the choleric mayor could deny.

"Perhaps you are right, Don Mateo; but what am I to do? A feud is a
feud. Our self-respect is at stake. If we don't keep these rascals down
they will have us down."

The old man left the consistorial building more sad than angry. The
vexations and worries he had suffered of the kind during the last three
years were innumerable. He could count on nobody to second him in any
plan for festivities. In vain did he exert himself to get any operatic
or dramatic company for the theatre; it soon fell to the ground, for if
the Club element prevailed the Cabin party withdrew, and _vice versâ_.
And as a general gathering is necessary for a theatrical performance,
the actors went off half dead with hunger.

When Don Mateo went about begging for subscriptions, the first thing
asked was:

"Has So-and-so subscribed, and So-and-so, and So-and-so?" And if he
answered in the affirmative, the reply would be:

"Then do not count upon us."

Our good friend tried at last to win them over by diplomacy, but the
implacable townsfolk were too sharp for him, and they would not let him
escape telling them who were going. And if this was so with regard to
the theatre, it was much worse in the case of any artists pitching their
tents in the town.

There was a famous violinist, a man who played admirably on an
instrument of wood and straw; four bell-ringers, brothers; a Moor, who
exhibited two wise cows; an English scientist with a microscope; a
celebrated Chinese giant, and a sea-calf that said "papa," "mama," etc.
Don Mateo had patronized them all, but his canvassing campaigns on their
behalf did not prove successful. All the curiosities, Spanish as well as
foreign, knew by report our retired colonel, and directly they set foot
in Sarrio they went to call at his house. He went with them to see the
mayor, introduced them at the Club, recommended them to the owner of the
storehouse where they thought of exhibiting, and he nearly always headed
the subscription to pay their journey, and not one of them left the town
in former days without being pleased and satisfied; but now they all
said their receipts did not pay for the flagstaffs.

Don Mateo's right hand in all these festivities was Severino, of the
ironmongery shop. Nobody in the province could equal him in the
manufacture of beautiful, elegant, well-arranged decorations, nor in the
difficult art of putting up green arches with lamps for the night, nor
in his power of sending off rockets swiftly and perpendicularly. Well,
this ingenious fellow, who had so delighted the town with his various
inventions, had now been idle for some time.

"Severino, we must think of arranging something for the eve of St.
Anthony."

"What, Don Mateo, what?" returned the shop-keeper in a depressed tone.

"An illumination of two hundred lamps, an orb, and a few rockets."

"Do you wish us to pay the expense, as we did at the festival of Santa
Engracia?"

"Perhaps the West Indians will pay this time," muttered Don Mateo.

"No; don't be so simple; you seem to forget what they are. Pay, indeed!
Precious little will they pay!"

Everybody was rather unjust to the West Indians. They simply maintained
a strict neutrality, and wondered that worthy men like Belinchon,
Miranda, and others should excite themselves so much about things
outside their respective occupations and businesses. That handful of
calm people in the midst of the fierce contest which waged continually
would have been like the chorus of Greek tragedies if only they had not
been wanting in any exhibition of either joy or sorrow to either the
successes or the reverses of the actors in question. The West Indians of
Sarrio were utterly apathetic, dulled by their idle, monotonous life, in
which the recollections of their quondam hard work and trials in Cuba
sometimes filled them with horror, and added to their sense of comfort
at their present circumstances. What did they care for the resolutions
carried by the corporation, the attacks made in "The Light" and "The
Youth of Sarrio," or the schisms with which the town was continually
rent! While they were left quiet to take a turn in the morning on the
Mole (and there was no fear of that being disturbed), to play billiards
or _tresillo_ after dinner, and to take those famous walks in parties in
the picturesque suburbs, they did not care for anything. So little
interest did they take that they hardly ever mentioned the episodes of
the feud when they were together. The only thing that could disturb them
was the telegraphic notification of the rise and fall of the public
funds in which their capital was placed.

Otherwise they were model citizens, they gave no offense to anybody, and
they only enjoyed what they had worked hard for with their hands. They
did not give money to entertainments and performances. But this was not
a grave offense, for they saw no necessity for such festivities. What in
the world did people want more than to live in a pleasant climate and
quietly to eat, work, and sleep the hours away? Besides, they had
conferred a benefit on the town by conducting to the altar a number of
ladies between the years of twenty-five and thirty, who without this
unexpected deliverance would have been left to wither away on the stalk.
Now they were almost all stout, quiet matrons, mothers of happy
families, and managers of well-ordered houses.

These West Indians were the only people who escaped the incessant
attacks of the press, for whatever antipathy was nourished by both
parties against them, they did not dare make any public allusion to
them, as they had no ground for doing so. They therefore had to content
themselves with grumbling and calling them money-laden asses behind
their backs.

Thus in the course of three years Sarrio attained the height of
perfection that had been the dream of Don Rosendo; that is to say, there
was no longer any private life. The deeds of the townsfolk, were they of
the most private or the most insignificant character, came to light in
the press, and were the subject of censure, comment, and ridicule.
Nobody was safe, even in the sanctuary of his home. If rather ugly words
passed between a man and his wife, if he chastised his children with
more or less severity, if he were short of money, if he were at all
dissipated, if he dropped the c's in the middle of words and said _reto_
and _pato_ instead of _recto_ (straight) and _pacto_ (agreement), if he
ate with his fingers or snored loudly: all these interesting details
were recorded for the benefit of the public in "The Light" and "The
Youth of Sarrio," sometimes directly, and other times by means of the
famous Oriental stories already mentioned.

From the municipal chamber Don Mateo repaired to the Academy, where
Señor Anselmo was waiting for him, and it was with great tact that he
told him that the band was not to go out that afternoon.

By dint of negotiations and diplomacy he had so far managed to keep it
going as well as the Lyceum, although no theatrical performances were
now given there, neither was there any dancing, excepting on particular
days, such as those of Candlemas, Carnival, and Santa Engracia; but by
force of tact and energy Don Mateo had succeeded in making the majority
of the members continue their monthly subscription of two pesetas. All
the other places of recreation in which the town had been so rich had
disappeared. The cause of all the excitement at the present time was the
arrival of the Duke of Tornos.




CHAPTER XXIII

THE DUKE OF TORNOS APPEARS


The wide-awake, practical Don Rosendo found out through his agents in
Madrid that the Duke of Tornos, Count of Buena Vista, related to the
Royal family, former Ambassador in France, head major domo of the
palace, etc., a person of much consequence in court and political
circles, had decided to spend the summer in Sarrio for the benefit of
the sea air, which was considered better for him than that of San
Sebastian or Biarritz. When Belinchon heard of it he immediately wrote
the duke a letter, placing his house at his disposal.

The duke naturally refused with many graceful expressions of gratitude,
but Don Rosendo, who saw the great importance of the triumph of having
such a personage under his roof, with whose assistance he counted on
routing his adversaries, pressed the matter so much that the duke ended
by accepting the invitation.

The Cabin party, having scented the impressive news, made Don Pedro
Miranda also offer his house, promising to reimburse him for all the
expense which he would thereby incur. But the duke was already engaged,
and so was unable to accede to their request, pressing as it was, which
fact filled them with rage, as we shall see. We must mention that the
Duke of Tornos belonged to the Moderate party, and although in Sarrio
neither the Club nor the Cabin party was very conversant with politics,
as the local strifes absorbed all their attention, and their sympathies
were always for the party in power, there was no doubt that liberal
views prevailed at the Club, beginning with its enterprising chief,
while at the Cabin they were more conservative. Therefore the favor
conferred on the first was the more trying.

Don Rosendo had had an extra story built to his house the previous year.
The birth of another grandchild had induced him to have it done. If the
marriage continued to be so fruitful the house would soon be too small
for the family. Gonzalo had talked of taking one for himself, as he
wanted to be more independent, and to prevent this his father-in-law
adopted this plan, and the new floor was built for the young family so
that it should be independent. The staircase did not pass through the
parents' quarters, although there was a little inner iron stairway,
which facilitated communication between the two parts of the house.
Gonzalo could enter and leave his dwelling without having to pass
through his father-in-law's house, but they still had their meals
together.

But when the Duke of Tornos accepted the invitation it was decided that
he was to have the quarters of the young married couple, and they were
to return to their old rooms. This was easily managed, for Venturita had
furnished her domain with such luxury that it was speedily and easily
converted into an abode worthy of the personage who was to be the
honored guest. The telegram from his secretary announcing his departure
from Madrid was anxiously awaited at the Club, and the faces of all the
members glowed with joy and triumph, and shone with the hope that they
would soon be able to give some decisive blows to their adversaries, who
went about with black, angry looks, although they tried to hide their
vexation under a feigned ignorance of the magnitude of the event of the
duke's arrival. It was not long before somebody came to tell Belinchon
of the mayor's cross-grained conduct about the music. He was at dinner
when the news arrived, but with an admirable serenity that his enemies
might have envied he finished the plate of soup before him, wiped his
mouth, drank a glass of wine, wiped his mouth again, and quietly rose
from the table without saying a word.

Like all the great leaders we read of in history, Don Rosendo never lost
his dignity, and it was in critical moments like the present that he
was inspired with the grandest ideas and the most helpful resolutions.
He went at once to the telegraph office, and wired to the conductor of
the orchestra at Lancia to come immediately to Sarrio and he would be
well paid.

The conductor replied that they would be there that evening. "All
right," he then said to himself; "if the music be not there to receive
him, at least he shall have a serenade, and these wretches can rage as
much as they like."

The arrival of the Duke of Tornos was, as we have seen, coincident with
the fair of St. Anthony. The afternoon was like the morning, bright and
clear, without the least heat, for the northeast wind of Sarrio and all
Biscayan ports tempers the heat of the summer sun most delightfully.
These fairs are frequented by all classes of society, more especially
the artisans, so that they have retained their primitive, festive,
cheerful character. From early morning numerous groups of girls leave
the suburbs and cross the town to take the road to Lancia, clad in the
classic black or colored merino skirt, with the flowered cotton
handkerchief crossed in front and behind, low shoes, pearl earrings, and
smooth, well-brushed, uncovered hair. Their merry talk and bright
laughter awaken the quieter townsfolk, still in bed, and make them smile
at pleasant recollections of the St. Anthony days of their youth, when
merriment had also shone in their eyes, and no drop of gall had yet
fallen into their cup of life. What girl in Sarrio would not recollect
some one of these journeyings to the hermitage on a soft, pleasant
morning, when the feet seemed winged and the heart beat quickly at the
thought of soon seeing and spending the day with the adored swain!

These maidens seemed to emit a waft of brightness which rose from the
street to the houses, entered the windows, and invited the inmates to
leave for a few hours the heavy weight of business, ambition, envy, and
all the low passions which make up the sum of human misery, and follow
them in the enjoyment of the fresh morning air, the green fields, the
incomparable rich milk sold at the hermitage, in the games of puss in
the corner and blind man's buff, in the languid Spanish dances, Morana's
sweet caramels and cakes, and, what was better still, the kisses of
somebody, when the face was not ugly and the hairs of the _mostacho_ not
too obtrusive.

Pablito sallied forth in the early morning, accompanied by his faithful
Piscis, both mounted on fine spirited horses, which of course pirouetted
from side to side. A weighty reason added to his equestrian propensity
made him use this mode of transport. Young Belinchon had not frequented
any fairs for the past year, and avoided going on foot. He seldom left
the house, especially at night, and only traversed the most frequented
streets, and then very rarely alone. He had hidden and bitter enemies.
Valentina, the fair, vivacious seamstress, had sworn by all the saints
of heaven to plant a dagger in his back.

It is needless to give the reason why. After having ruined her he had
abandoned her and gone elsewhere, like a careless, gaudy butterfly which
flies from flower to flower. It had cost him some trouble, or rather
some alarm. When he heard of his lover's oath, which did not surprise
him, as he knew her character so well, he tried to avoid an early,
wretched death by sending different emissaries to her with offers of
sums of money, her maintenance without work, and suggesting to take and
bring up the child. The angry seamstress indignantly rejected all these
offers, repeating her horrible, bloodthirsty oath each time an
ambassador came to see her.

Naturally our handsome youth felt rather qualmish under the
circumstances, and he would have given his carriage and horses to have
had eyes at the back of his head. He made the best of those he had, and
whenever he went out on foot he exhausted himself in looking about him.
But confidence came with time, for as Valentina scarcely ever left home,
and never frequented balls and fairs since her trouble, nobody had seen
her. So Pablito, never meeting her on the street, felt emboldened by
the suggestion of Piscis to go to the festival of St. Anthony.

Thus they mounted early, and took the wide, dusty Lancian road, shaded
for some distance from the town by majestic giant elms. The road
inclined, without being very steep, and on both sides was the smiling
district of Sarrio, bordered by two or three lines of undulating hills,
with the mountains of Narcin in the distance rising above the valley of
Lancia still lying in mist.

Looking back after going some distance, the beautiful town was seen
bathed in the sunlight, which brightened the white fronts of the houses,
while the vast expanse of the sea, touched by the oblique rays of the
rising sun, presented a milky-white appearance.

The horses of our equestrians, in the pride of their beautiful breed and
their bright, shining backs, caracoled incessantly, which ostentatious
display of their muscular power in the morning light raised clouds of
dust. The work-girls who were making their way to the hermitage grew
impatient, and chaffed the riders more from vexation at the dust than
from fear of the horses; and taunts in somewhat bad taste were cast at
the severe Piscis, who turned a deaf ear to them, so absorbed was he in
the contemplation of the hoofs of the horses, as their right elevation
had been entrusted to his training.

"Bah! the road is too narrow for him!"

"I say, parson, don't kick up such a dust! On horseback you think
yourself somebody, but you look like a puppy-dog. You fancy yourself a
duke, and you look like a monkey."

They did not interfere with Pablito. The bizarre youth exercised the
same fascination over the work-girls as he did over the young ladies.
Not only were they attracted by his fine figure, his gallantry and his
riches, but also, and perhaps chiefly, by his conquests. The number of
adorers he had had in all classes made an aureole of glory round his
head. There had been much talk against him among the artisans on account
of the affair with Valentina; they called him false, traitor, rogue; but
all of them, even the friends of the victim, admired him in secret, and
would have required little persuasion to fall into his arms, much as
they swore and declared that she had been very foolish to think anything
of that flirt.

Pablito pursued his way in a serious mood, also busy with his skittish
quadruped. Nevertheless, he occasionally deigned to smile slightly, and
this suspicion of a smile so excited the girls that they threw
additional fire and wit into their attacks on the invulnerable Piscis.

About two miles on there was a beautiful open green space crossed by the
road, which was to be the scene of the festivities in the afternoon,
when the people came from the town and the others returned from the
hermitage. To go to the hermitage one had to leave the highroad and take
the narrow, steep paths bound by little stone walls covered with briers.
A mile further on one came on to another open space on the top of the
little hill where the shrine stood. The view from thence was beautiful
and unequaled. There was an immense expanse of seacoast, not flat, but
hilly, planted in some places with maize, in others with corn, and in
most places only with grass, and intersected by the long, dusty road of
Lancia, with its dark, level line of gigantic elms terminating in the
pink and white line of the town.

By the shrine young women from the neighborhood, with more than one
satin-cheeked, ruddy-lipped peasant girl, were selling milk in little
earthenware mugs. There were also tables covered with cloths spread with
_bizcochos_ (milk biscuits flavored with cinnamon) and other sugar
pastry of ancient renown. The chief feature of the festival was to drink
milk in the morning at the hermitage, play with the mugs, and then break
them by rolling them down the hill. At twelve o'clock they ate the
provisions brought with them, and then repaired to the walnut grove, the
usual scene of the gathering. Pablito did not omit a single item of the
program. He bought more than a dozen mugs of milk and a great quantity
of biscuits, with which he laid siege to his friends, and then played
with them so roughly that they often lost their footing and he fell with
them onto the ground, to the great delight of the onlookers. He was most
assiduous in his attentions to a very pretty, dark young girl, daughter
of Maroto the policeman, who sold fish in the market-place, to whom the
reader will recollect Periquito said, in the pit of the theatre,
"Ramona, I love you," to the great amusement of Piscis and Pablo.

When the hour came for repairing to the walnut grove he tried to put her
upon his horse in front of him. The girl resisted a little, but at last
she gave in, for there was no help for it. So the youth arrived with her
in the midst of the feast, to the applause and hurrahs of his friends,
while the other girls expressed disapproval, and looked scandalized,
although they were the first to succumb to the charms of the handsome
sultan when they were the objects of his attentions.

By three o'clock the walnut grove was full of visitors. The vast green
formed an emerald ground upon which the kerchiefs of the women, white,
red, and yellow, in continual motion, formed a movable design in
brilliant colors. Fresh arrivals came by the high road from Sarrio, and
dispersed on the green on both sides. The roar of conversation, like
the waves of the sea, was audible a little distance off, and the sharp
twang of the guitar could be heard above the dull, monotonous sound and
ring of the tambourine. There were some tents with rough plank tables
loaded with swollen goatskins of wine, like victims prepared for
sacrifice, surrounded by numerous groups of men. Then on the green there
was a large crowd of both sexes, in the centre of which the dance of the
country was going on to the sound of the castanets and with the motions
peculiar to the district.

The dance continued five or six hours without any pause whatsoever. They
perspired freely, but they were never fatigued. The men might be so
sometimes, the women never. Those who danced so much were country girls
from the neighboring villages, who returned home by the cross-roads
without passing through the town.

The artisans of Sarrio made up parties for the _giraldilla_ (a
Moro-Spanish country-dance), in which they sang in loud voices as they
opened and closed the lines, leaving in the middle now a group of women,
now a group of men. The young gentlemen knowing the girls through the
dances at the schools, and accustomed to the pleasure, did not wish to
relinquish their right of monopoly in the open air, and so they joined
them, although they danced without grace with loose arms and stiff
legs. Then a little further off the artisan lads danced with the girls
who were either neglected by the gentlemen or, being of a superior
calibre, cast scornful looks in their direction and preferred their own
class.

It must not be thought that fashionable dances were omitted that
afternoon. Don Mateo having sought for a substitute for the orchestra,
had come upon an Italian harpist and violinist, and had paid them to
play out of his own pocket. So there, in a corner of the green, under an
immense walnut tree, within a rope barrier, were a dozen closely clasped
couples giving occasional turns to the measure of the charming national
_habanera_, surrounded by a large crowd of spectators.

The young ladies smiled derisively at this rough imitation of their own
dances, and felt sorry that such handsome young men should dance with
such awkwardness. But when any of the party ventured to ask one for a
turn, she, after a little demurring, laughing and blushing, and such
like, to show that the act was purely one of condescension, took the arm
of the swain and joined in the dance.

Gonzalo came to the feast on foot with Cecilia, the eldest child, and
the nurse. And as the road was long and steep, he carried his little
girl almost all the way to prevent her getting tired. Ventura hated
festivals; besides, her father had taken the carriage to meet the Duke
of Tornos, and to think of going nearly two miles on foot was a
monstrous idea. Doña Paula could not go either, for she had been
delicate for some time, and the doctors thought that weakness and her
want of health were due to a defect of circulation, a cardiacal
affection which might turn serious at any time, although not so at
present. Cecilia had wanted to release Gonzalo from his burden during
the walk, but he had laughingly said:

"You, you little skeleton," for so he called her jokingly; "be quiet,
and don't let me have to carry you, too."

And so they arrived like husband and wife, and proceeded to wander over
the green, stopping every instant to greet friends they met. They bought
sweets for the child, they stood looking at the dancing to the guitar,
then they stopped by the _giraldilla_, and finally they went to where
the harp and the violin were being played, and there they saw Pablo
among the dancing couples, with his arm encircling the form of the
beautiful Ramona. Certainly the fantastic youth seemed a little confused
when he saw them, and, turning to his sister, he asked:

"Is mama here?"

Cecilia made a negative gesture, and he was reassured.

The child being soon tired of watching the dancing, asked to return to
the peasants' dance. So recrossing the highroad, they went back to the
gaieties on the other side, which was very fortunate for them, for just
at that moment a fearful blood-curdling scene befitting a romantic
tragedy was enacted on the spot they had quitted.

Pablito was dancing with his dark young lady, serene in his enjoyment of
cutting a good figure. His face, always fresh-looking, was now extremely
bright, not so much from physical exercise as from emotional excitement
under the sensuous strains of the dance music. Ramona also, as scarlet
as a poppy, leaned her chin, embellished with two ravishing dimples, on
his shoulder, when she was suddenly horror-struck at the sight of a
livid face with two flaming eyes, and Pablito heard a discordant cry
behind him:

"Take that, villain!" and at the same time he felt a sharp dig in his
back. He turned quickly round, and saw the fury-fraught, distorted face
of Valentina, brandishing a weapon in her hand. The youth thought he was
mortally wounded and fell to the ground with deathly signs upon his
countenance. A crowd of people immediately hastened to raise him, while
others caught hold of the seamstress. As he was being carried to a
neighboring cottage, Pablito thought he heard the cries of Valentina,
who was trying to free herself from her captives, doubtless still
anxious to kill him.

The news spread through the place. Many people ran to the scene. Cecilia
and Gonzalo, seeing the excitement, asked what it was about; and a
friend, who knew the truth, told them that there was only a dispute
among the peasants, and so managed to get them away.

In the meanwhile the doctor from a neighboring village, who was there,
was asked to go and dress the wound. He was a young man fresh from the
lecture hall. The first thing he did was to take off the youth's coat by
cutting it down the back, and doing the same with his waistcoat and
shirt, and when the flesh was bared he could not help laughing:

"What a wound! There is nothing to be seen."

In fact, the little penknife with which the seamstress had attempted his
murder had pierced his coat, his waistcoat, and his shirt; but as to the
flesh, it had been left intact. Pablo was greatly relieved to find
himself still in the land of the living. Then the woman of the house
temporarily stitched up his shirt and he put on the doctor's coat while
Piscis went to fetch the horses. Pablo left the house by the back way,
and struck across the fields so as not to be seen, for he was not only
ashamed of being seen in that dreadful garb, but he was filled with
horror at the recollection of the baneful words of Valentina, for if he
remembered rightly (and his faint condition had not been conducive to a
great feat of memory), the seamstress had cried, when he was carried
away by the four men:

"Get along, brute; and if I have not killed you now, somebody will soon
do so."

Pablito was in such deadly fear of being killed by an unknown hand that
he would not stay a minute longer at the fair, and when he reached the
road, where Piscis was waiting for him, he mounted his horse and lost no
time in regaining the town. The sun was sinking. Some of the people
began leaving the fair, when there was a great excitement at the sight
of six or eight carriages coming along the road from Lancia. It was the
Duke of Tornos and his suite. In an open carriage he was seated with his
secretary and the great patrician, Don Rosendo. In the next carriage
came Don Rufo, Alvaro Peña, and two gentlemen from Lancia; and in the
others were Don Rudesindo, Navarro, Don Jeronimo de la Fuente, and
several other partizans of the illustrious Belinchon followed in the
other vehicles.

On arriving at the walnut grove the duke was astonished at the sight of
the motley crowd assembled on the green. He was a man forty-six years of
age, with flaccid cheeks of a sickly hue, a drooping lower lip,
expressive of boredom and disdain; his cold, glassy, squinting eyes had
a vacant expression, and in one of them he had an eyeglass fixed which
gave an excessively impertinent look to his repulsive face. He had no
beard, but a long mustache with waxed ends. He dressed in a style never
seen in the country; that is to say, with the capricious originality of
those who do not follow, but set the fashions. He wore a white American
hat with a wide brim. He had a yellow shirt, lilac-colored gloves, and
instead of a cravat a white handkerchief tied in the scarf form, with a
great pearl pin.

"Delightful! delightful!" he exclaimed at the sight of the picturesque
scene, languidly raising his eyelids. His voice was weak, and his
enunciation low and labored, as if he were applauding from his box the
trills of some prima donna at the Royal Theatre.

Don Rosendo gave him an explanation of the festival; he pointed to the
steep hill leading to the shrine, which was visible in the distance;
then he directed his attention to the different groups of dancers.

"There, Señor Duke, they are dancing to the strains of the guitar and
tambourine; it is the characteristic dance of the country. Over there is
the _giraldilla_, in which the town girls dance as they sing. There they
drink; those are the tables where sweetmeats are sold. Under that walnut
tree they are dancing the _habanera_. See, see, Señor Duke, it is the
classic dance of our country--the men on one side, the women on the
other; they go on quietly for hours and hours, singing the old ballads.
It is a chaste dance, as you acknowledge."

"Delightful! delightful!" repeated the duke in his drawling tone,
directing his eyeglass chiefly at the _giraldilla_. The Duke of Tornos
was right. Few more cheerful, beautiful sights could be seen in any
other spot on earth.

The feast waxed frenzied at its close. The guitar accentuated its sharp,
strident tones, which vibrated in the far distance, accompanied by the
persistent, dull sound of the tambourine; the young girls, excited and
hot, with their cheeks on fire and their hair in disorder, not only
sang, but shouted as they revolved in the _giraldilla_, and waxed
desperate at the cessation of the enjoyment so seldom at their command.
Those who had been indulging in wine also joined in the cries, with
nasal sounds, as they tried to maintain their equilibrium upon the
grass. And the lads and lasses of the _danza-prima_ (first figure), in
increasing excitement, raised the tone of the long, monotonous songs.
Even the Italian harpist and violinist dashed into a mazurka, of which
the couples showed their appreciation by kicking out wildly on the
grass.

Light was leaving the picture, and as it faded a mysterious poetic charm
pervaded the scene and reminded one of the happy retreats of old
Arcadia.

It seemed as if the people ought to live and die thus in perpetual
happiness and youth. Why leave the spot, why withdraw from that happy
retreat to return to the fatigues of daily life, the anxieties and cares
of business? To enjoy, in innocence of heart and feeling, health and the
sublime harmonies of life and sound; to enjoy the delights of love, the
root of all things; to enjoy the force that maintains the cohesion of
the universe; to enjoy the plumage of the birds, the murmur of the
streams, the scent of the flowers, the dew of the fields, the foam of
the sea, the eternal blue of the skies: for this it is to be created a
man, not to fill the brief days of one's ephemeral existence with bitter
vengeance, pale jealousy, and gnawing depression. The tradition of
Paradise is the most ancient and logical of human traditions.

The sun now gilded the tops of the walnut trees which surrounded the
green and cast long shadows upon the ground. A slight shudder of cold
and melancholy ran through the company, which those who were heated with
dancing or wine vainly strove to resist. It soon permeated the whole
assembly. Voices were heard of mothers calling to their children, and of
brothers to their sisters; groups were formed that waited for a moment
to see if their party was complete before starting off. The first to
break up was the _giraldilla_; the singing and dancing went on, for as
the peasant folk had not so far to go in returning to their homes, they
had no fear of nightfall.

The people collected by the carriages in the middle of the road. The
duke turned his eyeglass in all directions, looking at the preparations
of departure with the eye of a connoisseur in painting. At last, seeing
the great crowd assemble from all sides, he gave orders to go on slowly
in the wake of the crowd, as he wished to see everything, not because it
was beautiful, but because it was new to him.

The carriages then proceeded in the midst of the crowd, surrounded by
affectionate couples in intimate converse; old men leading children by
one hand and carrying handkerchiefs full of sweetmeats in the other;
groups of girls interchanging their experiences in loud voices, with
much laughter. As soon as they had gone a little distance from the
walnut grove, the canticles, which were the chief features of the
festivals of the neighborhood, commenced.

The artisans have good reason to be proud of their voices. They
generally sing some sentimental song to a drawn-out, melancholy tune, a
harmonious accompaniment being given by the seconds in thirds; at other
times, when the party is larger, they use the traditional street
ditties, which are various and delightful. That they did on this
occasion. The duke was surprised at hearing the chorus of fresh voices
incessantly repeating simple couplets like the following:

    "I was high above
     In the tower of love;
     The foundations rumbled,
     But I never tumbled.

    "Why should the poor
     Call at your door,
     When your palm never itches
     To give of your riches?"

But the puerile ideas of the lines acquired in their mouths an undue
importance. They seemed solemn phrases, mysterious and wondrous formulas
that no outsider could enter into without sacrilege. The air seemed
filled with those sweet, drawn-out sounds; an indescribable feeling
pervaded the singers from whose mouths they fell; each time they
repeated them with more tenderness, with more unction, as they colored
them with those poetic sentiments which always fill their hearts, and
are transmitted from mothers to daughters in the romantic Biscayan town.
It was the melancholy of those who apprehend the world of beauty, love
it, and are forced by circumstances to live and die far from it. Between
the couplets there was a silent pause, filled with the tramp of feet.
The choir seemed to be in a waking dream, only alive to the vague
feelings which the song aroused in the depths of their hearts.

Night fell suddenly. The branches of the high elms stood out clearly in
the diaphanous atmosphere, but the shadows cast upon the road became
darker. The landscape had lost its color, and the bluish hue of the
tracts planted with corn were hardly distinguishable in the shades of
evening. The great sweep of the ocean in the distance was now
indistinct. The brilliant blue of midday had changed into a metallic
greenish gray. The choir soon shook off its melancholy. A young girl
started a bright, merry air, and the others willingly joined in, as if
glad to awake from a sad dream:

    "Do not bewail
     That you must fail
     To go to Anthony Fair,
     There to tread on air;
     For lo! it is raining,
     And you'll be complaining
     That no more you will get
     The dress now so wet."

This was sung with the eager shout of enthusiasm usual with such songs,
and a few minutes after its conclusion an improvised couplet,
illustrating the present situation, followed:

    "Come to St. Anthony Fair;
     There you will stare;
     A duke to see
     As polite as can be.
     The girls laughed and ran
     To see such a great man."

And thenceforth the magnate was introduced into the songs; and he,
turning his eyeglass from right to left, and shaking his head with a
benevolent smile, repeated in a low voice:

"Delightful! delightful! A Teniers picture! a Lorena's landscape!"

By the time they reached the town night had closed in. The duke with his
secretary withdrew to the rooms prepared for him by Don Rosendo. The
secretary was a young man of six-and-twenty, pale, and red-haired, whose
undeveloped brain contained no idea beyond that of the colossal
importance of the duke, and the imperious necessity of becoming a
personage, if not of so much consequence, yet important enough to also
have a secretary. Beyond these ideas the world had no other meaning for
Cosio, for such was his name.




CHAPTER XXIV

WHAT HAPPENED AT DINNER


The magnate came down to dinner in the orthodox evening dress. Cosio did
the same. Don Rosendo had changed the Spanish hour of dinner for the
French. Seeing him enter in evening dress, the Belinchon family were
much upset. It was evident that Belinchon, his son, and his son-in-law
had made a mistake in not dressing. Venturita mentioned the fact in a
cross, low tone to her husband, but he only shrugged his shoulders and
moved his lips in a scornful way. He was out of temper, for when asking
his wife why the table had been laid without a place for the child, she
had rudely said:

"But, Gonzalo, don't be silly! Do you want the child to dine to-day with
us?"

"Why not?"

Venturita was shocked, and then she laughingly asked him if he had
learned those fashions in the regatta clubs in England. This had so put
him out that he did not feel inclined to show the duke the respect and
deference due to him. His wife, on the contrary, had been busy for days
preparing for the reception of the illustrious visitor.

The staff of servants had been increased at her suggestion and under her
directions, and the menservants were put into livery.

When Gonzalo saw Pachin, an old retainer, in his uniform, he burst out
laughing, which greatly excited the ire of his wife. She also instituted
a new, aristocratic arrangement of Belinchon's table, with the
introduction of dessert knives and forks, fish knives, and lithographed
cards for the menu, besides other innovations hitherto unknown at the
meals of the house. The foreign element also modified the healthy,
patriarchal, abundant fare which we saw at the beginning of this story.

Ventura appeared in the drawing-room with a low-necked blue silk dress
and bare arms. She had learned, we know not where, that at formal
dinners ladies should wear low-necked gowns. Doña Paula did not go so
far as that, but she was gorgeously dressed in bright-colored materials
that formed a sad contrast to her thin face, wasted by illness. The only
guests were Alvaro Peña and Don Rufo. Pachin, the good Pachin, in his
new livery, opened the door and said, with a sonorous voice, in which he
had been drilled by Ventura:

"Dinner is served!"

The duke offered his arm to Doña Paula, and they all repaired to the
dining-room. The hostess took the chief place, in accordance with her
daughter's previous injunction. The duke sat at her right hand, Don Rufo
at her left, and the others took their seats as they liked. Venturita
had her place set at the right hand of the distinguished guest, then
came Alvaro Peña, Cosio, Pablito, and Don Rosendo, while Gonzalo sat by
the side of Cecilia.

Then the dinner began with stiff ceremony and long intervals of silence.
They were all oppressed and overwhelmed with the grandeur of the guest.
The thin hair on the back and the side of the duke's shiny bald head was
still black in spite of his forty-six years. His slightest movements
were the object of the company's admiring attention, and his remarks
were received by the company with smiles of delight and adulation.

The first words that fell from his lips after a few conventional
courtesies expressed his admiration of the suburbs of the town.

"I only know the provinces in the north," he said in a slow, drawling
tone. "I find this much superior to that in the way of scenery; it
offers more variety, richer coloring, and there are lovely spots in the
district we have traversed, comparable to the most enchanting scenes in
Switzerland. Then on arriving at the coast there is the same softness of
outline, the same sweetness of atmosphere as in the south of Italy."

"Oh, Señor Duke, you are too flattering! Pure kindness, Señor Duke. In
the summer this country is all very well, but in winter!"

Don Rosendo, Alvaro Peña, and Don Rufo, overwhelmed with joy and
gratitude, blushed, and disclaimed the encomiums as if they had been the
objects of them. The duke continued speaking, as if he had not heard
their exclamations.

"It is more hilly than the northern provinces, the tones are more
marked. I saw from the Lancian road, looking eastward, a group of
mountains with the summits still covered with snow, which was truly
beautiful. It only wants a few lakes, and foreigners would resort to
it."

"We have a lake in the west of the province," said Peña.

"A lake?" queried the duke, as he raised his eyelids to look at the
interlocutor.

"Yes, señor; the lake is called Nordon."

Then the duke kept his glassy gaze fixed upon the officer until he grew
confused, and after bringing each person at the table into the focus of
that gaze, he continued:

"In my gallery at Bourges I have a landscape, by Backhuysen, with a
background very similar to that of these mountains. Only in the
foreground there is a lake surrounded with briers. On the right there
are some swans swimming on the water, and on the left there is a boat
with two young peasants. I bought it merely for the delicacy of the
coloring."

"The señor duke seems to like good pictures," said Don Rufo, stretching
his mouth from ear to ear to speak with a befitting smile.

"And who does not like them?" returned the magnate, looking at him with
his squinting eyes.

"Oh, yes, señor--it is true--you are very right! Everybody likes them.
But it is an expensive taste--only great people like the señor duke can
allow themselves the luxury."

Don Rufo here became confused, thinking he had said something
disrespectful.

"The señor duke has many pictures of the best painters from what I
hear," said Don Rosendo, coming to his friend's assistance.

"I have a few," returned the nobleman, pouring some water into
Venturita's glass. This act overwhelmed the girl with gratitude, and the
blood rushed to her face.

"The duke's is one of the first galleries in Europe," said Cosio in a
low voice to Peña.

"I like painting because it is the national art," continued the magnate.
"It is the only one in which we have really advanced; it is the only one
in which we distinguish ourselves in the present day--because, although
I have spent a great deal of my life abroad, I am very fond of my
country," he added in a patronizing tone, with a slight smile.

If the country could have heard those fine words it would doubtless,
like Venturita, have trembled for joy.

"I love it notwithstanding I acknowledge its backward condition. Nature
has endowed us liberally with rich gifts. A fertile country--not so much
so as is commonly believed, but, in short, fertile--admirably situated
at one side of Europe, stretching her hand to America across the seas; a
sky--oh, the sky! There is not another like it. The air has here, above
all in the south, a transparency--oh, an infinite transparency! The
despair of painters. Then this transparency gives greater purity to the
outlines; nowhere do points stand out as they do here. In Castile the
towers are visible many miles off, and as distinct as if they were only
a few steps distant. It is quite evident this is due to its being above
the level of the sea."

"The countries which lie much higher than the level of the sea are the
least intelligent," remarked Don Rufo, glad to air his physiological
mania.

The duke turned his head to look at the speaker, and then went on as if
he had not heard him.

"Then the great power of the sun throws up the contrast between the
light and the shade, and gives a distinct outline even to the distant
mountains. Only here in the north the vapors floating in the atmosphere
rather blur and confuse the contours, and make them misty. But, on the
other hand, the tones are richer; in the south the shades of the ground
are lost in the excessive brilliance of the sky, in the universal sense
of light. But here what an immense variety of shades! Oh, infinite
beauty! Then what power, what changes! In the south the tone is
stationary; the immutable light of the sky keeps it the same for many
hours, and the same one day as another; but in these provinces, where
the light changes every minute, the color varies, too; the composition
is perfect, the gradations of color are slight, and its general tone is
transformed into strong reliefs."

The duke, having begun enumerating the advantages possessed by the
Spaniards, could not leave the subject of contour, light, and color, and
lost himself in disquisitions on landscape, to which the company
listened without understanding, with open eyes and idly moving lips.

But without ceasing talking he attended to Venturita, anticipating her
wishes, pouring water into her glass, handing her the condiments, the
bread, or anything she might want, signing to the servant to give her
wine when he noticed that her glasses were empty, and all with the easy,
polished ways of a man accustomed to society. Venturita accepted these
attentions shyly and smilingly, and trembling with gratitude, without
understanding that at that moment she was nothing to the magnate but the
lady on his right.

Gonzalo, not feeling well disposed to the egregious guest, became tired
of the monologue on painting, and exchanged a few whispered remarks with
his sister-in-law, joking her as usual on her small appetite.

"Come, bag of bones, another cutlet. Don't be ashamed because the señor
is here. We told you that he will not be astonished at the quantity you
eat. Constitutions like yours require a little fat."

Cecilia, smiling, replied with broken words, with respectful glances at
the duke; and he, having noticed that they had spoken, raised his eyes
and gave them a vacant, contemptuous look. The second time, particularly
as Gonzalo and Cecilia put their table-napkins to their mouths to stop
the sound of their laughing, the glance of the nobleman was longer,
colder, and more abstracted than ever. Venturita showed her annoyance
with her eyes, but Gonzalo, either from a wish to avenge his wife's
former slighting remarks, or because he really did not feel the shyness
and awe with which the personage inspired the others, did not desist
from joking with his sister-in-law and making her laugh.

The affectionate feeling between the brother and sister-in-law had not
decreased. Gonzalo and his children were the especial care of Cecilia.
Her beneficial, sweet influence was felt every moment of their lives.
The eldest little girl, Cecilita, now two years and a half old, and the
other, Paulina, who was eight months old, throve under their aunt's
maternal warmth of affection: she washed them, she dressed them, she
took them out to walk, she was the first to teach them to pray. The
mother, fond as she was of her children, soon wearied of them; their
crying worried her; and when it was a question of keeping them quiet she
was ignorant of any method of doing so, and only ended by half
suffocating them with caresses.

Thus it came about that "auntie" was the refuge to which they ran, and
for which they cried in any distress. Sometimes Ventura, wounded at this
preference, grew jealous, and made them stay with her by force, but this
only resulted in making them afraid of her.

As to Gonzalo, he had in Cecilia a sister and a mother, ever ready to
save him discomfort and to remove all thorns from his path; she always
had a soothing effect upon him, and he would go to her like a great
spoiled child, annoyed if his wishes were not immediately complied with,
and not sparing her in any way.

But the bond between him and his wife remained firm and unchanged; his
passionate admiration, which had made him commit the first sin of his
life, had not abated in spite of everything; she was still the orbit of
his life. Ventura kept her hold over him by the power of her beauty,
which continued to fascinate his senses. Cecilia understood it all, and
when the young man, wounded by some neglect or some unkind word of his
wife, broke out in complaints against her, she smiled sadly, and tried
to calm him, while she was sure that her brother-in-law would soon lower
himself by going to his wife in contrition and shame to kiss her very
feet.

When the nobleman had finished his monologue a few minutes' silence
ensued. Then, as if recollecting he had been remiss, he assumed a
benevolent interest in his companions' affairs.

"So Señor Don Rufo Pedroso is a doctor, eh? The practise of medicine is
arduous, especially in the provinces where, as a general rule, it does
not meet with due compensation. Señor Peña is a sailor, is he not? Oh,
the naval profession has always been brilliant. It is a pity that our
war material is not equal to the bravery and skill of the officers. They
have a hard time of it. Does the command of a harbor give much to do? I
thought of bringing before the Senate a motion asking for the
construction of two ironclads. And Pablito, does he have a good time in
Sarrio? What resources does the town offer to young men?" Had he been in
Madrid? He was fond of horses. Ah, riding was a grand exercise! The duke
could well sympathize with that taste. Were his horses Spanish or
foreign? He asked all these questions in an abstracted way, with an
artificial smile, as if he were reciting a lesson. In fact, the most
trying point of his code of manners was the necessity of recollecting
that one has to make one's self agreeable to people with whom one is
conversing, and to take an interest in their affairs.

He cast a cold glance at Gonzalo and Cecilia, but he directed no
questions to them. When the unpleasant task of conventionality was
accomplished the magnate resumed his eternal monologue. This time it was
not on painting, but on archeology. In Lancia he had seen a Byzantine
chapel, which had excited his attention by its purity, not having at
present been at all restored. The cathedral was not bad, only the tower
was too wide; evidently it was originally higher, but its dimensions had
doubtless been changed when rebuilt after its destruction by lightning.
He understood that Sarrio had a very beautiful church in the florid
style of architecture. While the duke continued this drawling, learned,
endless disquisition, Don Rosendo evinced by his eyes and gestures that
he was consumed with an anxiety which he vainly strove to conceal. Three
times he had asked a question of the servant in a low voice, and three
times he had received the answer also in a low voice.

The duke having concluded his archeological monologue, with the
perspicacity of the conceited, who know whom they fascinate and whom
they do not, then addressed his conversation to Venturita. The remarks
were now made with a little more animation, and the illustrious guest
occasionally deigned to smile, and to do his fair interlocutor the honor
of raising his drooping eyelids to give her a look of curiosity and
admiration. The girl was filled with pride at this mark of favor, and
with crimson cheeks and bright eyes she talked so naively and prettily
that the duke was quite delighted with her. They seemed to be talking of
painting, for Cecilia and Gonzalo, who were still joking together, heard
her say:

"Oh, Rubens! What flesh-painting! Rubens is the Cervantes of painting."

Gonzalo turned his head as if he had been struck, while his face
expressed his astonishment.

"Cecilia, where did my wife learn all that?" he asked his sister-in-law.

A shrug of the shoulders was the only reply. But Venturita had noticed
Gonzalo's movement, his surprise, and the remark he made to Cecilia. She
colored, and lowered her voice; then seeing her husband's mocking
expression, returned it with a quick, angry look.

In the meanwhile Doña Paula talked to Don Rufo about her heart
complaint; Cosio took pride in describing to Peña and Pablito all the
grandeur and luxury of the Castle of Bourges, where the duke had his
famous picture gallery. Only Don Rosendo remained silent, getting more
restless every minute, and making little balls of bread with his nervous
fingers. Suddenly his fine features expanded into a benevolent smile,
for all heads were simultaneously raised at the sound of a loud trumpet
in the street--it was the band from Lancia, arrived at last.




CHAPTER XXV

THE DUKE'S DIVERSIONS


"The Light" the following Thursday was almost entirely devoted to
panegyrics on the Duke of Tornos: the first part gave his biography, the
second a description of his arrival at the fair, and the romantic way he
was accompanied to the town by its most beautiful maidens to the sound
of triumphal song and music; then reference was made to this event in
the verses by one of Don Rufo's sons; and finally there figured in the
third part of the paper two or three striking paragraphs about the
illustrious arrival. "The Youth of Sarrio," on the contrary, only
noticed his arrival in a short, cold article called "Welcome." But the
opportunity was taken to deal a spiteful double-edged thrust at its
enemies. The article described Don Rosendo taking the duke to the Club
and introducing him to its chief members, and this gave the ground for
great fun to be made of Don Rudesindo, Don Feliciano Gomez, Alvaro Peña,
Don Rufo, and other worthy persons. The account excited great
indignation among all Belinchon's friends, and fired their hearts with
revengeful feelings, and its well-turned spiteful phrases caused it to
be universally attributed to Sinforoso Suarez.

What? Was not Sinforoso the chief editor of "The Light," the faithful
friend and follower of Don Rosendo? No; not now. He left his old friends
about a year ago and went over to the enemy's side, which, trading on
his weak disposition and the ruling passion of his soul, put the screws
on, and, seconded by his father and others, told him that there would be
no career open to him as long as he belonged to the Club party, for in
attacking the religious ideas of the place he shut himself out from all
respectable houses and all conquests of the fairer sex, and he was
bribed with the vague prospect of a brilliant marriage with one of
Maza's daughters. So finally, to the surprise and astonishment of the
town, he deserted his friends and patrons, and in the space of
twenty-four hours he exchanged the editorship of "The Light" for a place
on the staff of "The Youth of Sarrio."

This act, however, was not done with impunity, for when Alvaro Peña met
him the next time in the Rua Nueva at midday, he loaded him with
imprecations, and, what was worse, his fist left marks on his face. The
punishment was so humiliating that Sinforoso, who was lacking in neither
pride nor bravery, was filled with a burning desire for vengeance
against his fierce assailant. Arming himself with a bar of iron provided
by his new friends, he lay in wait for the officer at the corner of the
Calle of San Florencio, and gave him from behind a blow on the head
which felled him senseless to the ground. Peña was then carried to his
house, where he had to remain eight days in bed. His friends were
powerless to persuade him to place the matter in the hands of the law;
for being an irascible, impetuous man, he thought that legal proceedings
would be too temperate for him. It was reported that the officer, when
looking at the walls of the cemetery from his window, was heard to say
in decided tones:

"Poor Sinforoso! It won't be many days before he takes his permanent
place there."

These prophetic words caused a great sensation in the town, for the
speaker was supposed to be imbued with the power of fulfilling them. The
effect that they had on Sinforoso is indescribable. As soon as the
officer had sufficiently recovered from his wound to reappear in the
street, Perinolo's son made himself scarce; he was not seen for quite a
month. It was said that he only went out at night, and then with many
precautions. But as everything must come to an end, the young man
gradually relaxed his precautionary measures, as he thought that time
must have tempered the murderous intents of Peña. He gradually grew
accustomed to the danger, and ventured to go out in the daytime; but he
avoided the spots where he might meet his enemy by asking people he met
if they had seen him go by, and in what direction had he gone. The town,
therefore, was in a state of great excitement, as it daily expected that
a catastrophe would ensue.

On a certain afternoon, hearing that Peña had gone to the mouth of the
river with Don Rosendo, our Sinforoso ventured to enter the Café Marina
and call for a bottle of beer.

Having taken a seat at one of the tables nearest the door, he noticed
that many of his friends and acquaintances exchanged smiles and knowing
glances; and before many minutes had passed the stentorian voice of the
officer fell upon his ear, for he was carrying on a discussion with his
friends in a dark corner of the café. This sound made our journalist
throw himself on all fours, and, gaining the door in this ignominious
position, he quickly took to his heels.

When he was supposed to be well out of reach, one of the party said:

"Alvaro, do you know who was here just now?"

"Who?"

"Sinforoso; he has only just gone."

"Ah! bad luck to him!" exclaimed Peña, rushing more than running past
the tables, and leaving the place in a whirlwind. But where was
Sinforoso? After flying a good way down the street without knowing
whither, the officer was obliged to return to the café, mad with anger
and rage. Nevertheless, so much time elapsed without his coming across
his assailant that his anger cooled down, and when three months later he
met him at the end of the pier he contented himself with the
administration of a couple of kicks, and the son of Perinolo thanked his
stars for getting off so easily. The indignation aroused by the upstart
journal was tempered with the hope of annihilating "the reptiles" who
had started it, or at least humiliating them with the reported grandeur
of the duke. During the days succeeding the arrival of the grandee,
Belinchon's friends cast mocking glances at their rivals.

"Tremble, pettifoggers, tremble," their glances seemed to say. Even Don
Rosendo, so magnanimous, so philosophical, so humane, shared their
implacable rage and longed to exterminate his rivals.

The combative spirit which had taken possession of him gradually gained
ground, so much so that all his high-minded desire for progress and his
interest in the moral and material evolution of his natal town were
swallowed up in his burning desire to injure his enemies. This, however,
was only an incidental state of affairs. The depths of his soul
remained as pure and as progressive as when it left the hands of its
Creator.

The Club party formed an impassable barrier around the duke, and
according to the expression of "The Youth of Sarrio," it "sequestered"
him.

He never went into the street without being accompanied by four or six
of the most important members. Opportunities of approaching him nearer
were only afforded to such of the townsfolk as were considered worthy of
the honor, for parties and dances were given in the town and in the
suburbs, and Belinchon's friends were not remiss in arranging picnics
and fishing and hunting expeditions.

Really, life was pleasant in Sarrio in summertime. The duke, whose
coming had been heralded by the arrival of a quantity of luggage, was
supplied with all necessary materials for painting, and, profiting by
the leisure hours at his command, he produced pictures full of marvelous
inspiration. His intercourse with the Belinchon family was of a stiff
and courteous character, perfectly befitting the maintenance of a
requisite distance. His words and his manners were always touched with
an assumed protecting air, which somewhat softened the look of boredom
on his face when in repose.

It was only with Venturita that his dull eyes seemed to brighten a
little, and with her the duke's attention even increased to the point of
a free-and-easy gallantry. When chatting in the family circle his
glance was always turned in her direction, as if she were the only one
capable of understanding him. Gonzalo's wife was the first allowed to
see the creations of his brush, and her admiration was the only person's
he valued; he gave her some French novels to read, and the discussions
on the subjects and authors of these works formed topics of conversation
between them at table, to which the others listened without
understanding. After some days the duke suggested painting Venturita's
portrait. He said that landscape was his chief taste, he had painted
portraits only of the Duchesse de Montmorency and of one of the infantas
of Spain; but now he had a great fancy to paint Venturita just as he had
seen her for the first time in the low-necked blue dress. The young girl
felt immensely flattered: the first portrait a duchess, the second an
infanta, the third herself! Then that particular wish of painting her in
the dress worn the first evening! No doubt she had made a great
impression upon the duke. The sittings were started in one of the rooms
on the ground floor. Don Jaime, as the grandee was called, decided to
paint her reclining on a crimson sofa, with plants and flowers at her
side. Doña Paula, Gonzalo, and Cecilia were present at the first
sitting, but they soon wearied of being there, and during the subsequent
sittings they were alone, the mother only occasionally coming in to
give a glance at the picture and to say a few polite words.

During the fortnight that the painting of the portrait lasted, the
intimacy between the duke and the beauty made great strides. The grandee
even condescended to tell her a great deal of his private history; his
public one was known by everybody. Don Jaime de la Nava and Sandoval
married, when very young, a grand lady united by ties of blood to the
sovereign. The marriage did not prove happy. The passionate love of the
lady, which had led her to overstep the social barrier which separated
her from her husband, soon cooled down; differences arose, a scandal
took place, and a separation ensued. Although Don Jaime descanted on the
privileges and honors of his elevated position, he did not make it all
roseate, for no, he was a victim to fate, and only custom made him
callous to the sufferings to which he was a prey. He had not had time to
recover from the shock of his wife's treatment, but he found some
consolation in making bitter attacks upon the aristocracy of Madrid, and
the highest people of the land were not exempted from the venom of his
remarks. Venturita had thus an opportunity of gaining an insight into
the character of the magnate, and as the duke grew more at home with her
he took the measure of the girl's character. He would turn the
conversation to other topics, as if he felt it was not good form to
pursue depressing subjects; and he talked with perfect naturalness of
the immoral conduct of high-born ladies in Madrid as if it were a matter
of daily occurrence. The Duquesa de So-and-So is now with a certain
banker's son; the Marquesa de So-and-So has gone off to Brussels with
the son of the Russian ambassador; this lady takes up with toreadors,
that one with her groom; the Condesa de So-and-So is proud of having
three lovers at a time; the Baronesa de So-and-So had hers in the
carriage with her, while her husband drove on the box.

In fact, there was not a lady of the court at whom he did not cast some
aspersion, not excepting his wife herself. Once he concluded his
discourse by saying: "And finally, if you want to know what the
aristocracy of Madrid is like, you have only to take the Duchess de
Tornos, who is a conglomeration of all its vices."

Ventura was amazed. She had a vague idea of the duke's bad feeling
toward the duchess, but she had not thought it possible that a husband
could speak like that of his wife under any circumstances.

Nevertheless, she was so fascinated by the importance of the grandee
that she soon began to think that his cynicism and style of conversation
were only according to fashion and "good form."

Then spicy anecdotes followed of a most questionable character, but they
were told in the soft, low voice of the duke, and his lips were
wreathed with a smile of superiority as he said:

"One can tell you these things, as you are married."

It was thus that the young girl gained a panoramic view of the court
world, which she had been so anxious to know. The private life of those
pallid youths with waxed _mostachos_ she had seen driving smart vehicles
in the Castellana, and of those beautiful, proud ladies rolling by in
their carriages, scarcely deigning to cast a careless, scornful glance
at her, now passed before her mind's eye. While only affecting a polite
attention to these details of the world, she was in reality drinking
them in with feverish eagerness, for she had always a nascent desire for
brilliant society, extravagant fancies, and unattainable ambitions.

Thus the Duke de Tornos, inadvertently, and for the mere pleasure of
indulging his bored, wounded state of mind, did more for the corruption
of the young wife's soul in a few days than could have been done by a
whole course of novels.

Because, after all, what the novels say is not true; but the stories of
the duke had only recently taken place, and the people who had played a
part in them were really living persons known by their world; in fact,
to use a common expression, it was real life.

The grandee with his corrupt mind and worn-out body, and the beautiful
country girl anxious to fly to other spheres, doubtless both thought
they had been born to understand each other and to be drawn together
like certain forces in natural science. Venturita centred all her powers
of fascination upon the painter, and she became more engaging every day.
When the duke, raising his eyelids to look at her, evinced any sign of
admiration, her delight suffused her cheeks with crimson, and she was
filled with the deepest scorn for the state of life in which fate had
cast her lot.

Although she did not presume upon the friendliness of the grandee, she
ventured to joke with him a little occasionally, to the great distress
of Don Rosendo; in fact, she knew she was the favorite, and so she
assumed a coquettish manner in his company. The duke meanwhile, in spite
of his assumed indifference for all things in heaven or earth, devoted
an immense deal of attention to his coat, shirts, ties, and, in short,
all that constitutes man's attire; and the variety, originality, and
eccentricity of the costumes in which he appeared were a revelation to
Venturita and a source of wonder to the town. In fact, if she dressed
herself for the duke, he did so no less for her.

It gradually dawned upon Don Rosendo's younger daughter that the
friendship of the duke might be turned to account by augmenting her
father's political influence in the town, as well as by adding lustre
and dignity to the family.

For instance, he might have a large cross.

Those who had one were addressed as "excellency." If her father were an
excellency he would lose the stamp of a codfish merchant, which was an
offense to her. And why should it not come to pass? A person of such
influence as the duke could easily manage it. She had heard that a title
of count or marquis could be bought. A title! And Venturita, without
thinking of her elder brother and sister, lost herself in pleasant
thoughts of one day being addressed as "la señora marquesa," or "la
señora condesa."

But then that husband of hers was such a "boor"! So averse to
interfering with politics or asserting himself at all. Oh! if she were
but a man, what would she not do!

In a short time her friendship and influence with the duke increased to
such a degree that it was noticed not only by the inmates of the house,
but also by outsiders. Don Jaime even went to meet her when coming from
bathing, and walked back with her right across the town, to the great
excitement of the people. The girl nearly died with pleasure at the
thought of the envy of her friends at this mark of favor, for the duke
openly paid her a thousand attentions, and made no secret of admiring
her more than the other members of the family. Gonzalo was secretly
very much annoyed at this friendliness. He had disliked the duke from
the first, and he noticed that the antipathy was mutual, although, as a
man of the world, the duke had assumed a courteous, almost kind
demeanor, which would have disguised his feelings to any but a very keen
observer, or a simple-hearted fellow like Gonzalo. Nevertheless, with
his increased friendliness and ease with the wife there was a decrease
of animosity toward the husband, and his politeness seemed to be of a
sincere character. Knowing that Gonzalo was devoted to sport, he made
him a present of a magnificent gun which had been given him by the Czar
of Russia. Then the grandee frequently invited him to join him in
shooting expeditions, so that their relations became less strained. But
unfortunately an accident occurred which upset them again.

One day, Gonzalo having gone to Lancia on business for his
father-in-law, the duke went off coursing, only accompanied by Don
Feliciano and Don Sanjurjo, the notary; the dogs he took with him
belonged to the house. Then it happened that the harrier Gonzalo thought
most of, having bought him for a high price in England, misbehaved
himself. The fault that he committed was one of the gravest that can be
committed in the exercise of his duty; it was nothing less than dropping
a hare when the duke ran forward to take it from his mouth, so that the
timid creature, only wounded in one leg, escaped into the bracken.
Thereupon the rage of the grandee was so great that, raising his gun, he
fired upon the dog, but the animal, seeing the aggressive attitude of
the sportsman, ran away and got off scot-free.

The duke, in a fury, pursued the animal to put an end to it, but he
could not overtake it. The culprit fled from the scene, and was
invisible for the rest of the day. When the grandee reached home he was
told that the dog had returned, and then Don Jaime, who was still in a
rage, said to the servant:

"Catch that dog, take him out of the town, and shoot him."

The man-servant was thunderstruck. He stood for some minutes in doubt,
and then, cowed by the stern, imperious look of the duke, he bowed
submissively and proceeded to execute the order.

He called the dog, put a chain on him, and taking his gun he left the
house. How little the poor creature thought he was going to his death!
He leaped for joy; he wriggled with delight, and lavished such licks of
affection on the servant's face that the man's eyes filled with tears,
and he cursed the course of action to which he was compelled, for the
beautiful dog was a great favorite of his.

"Heaven's mercy on us! What should he say to Señor Gonzalo when he
heard that his Polion had been killed?"

Just as he was thinking this, Gonzalo appeared round the corner of the
street. He had arrived in the coach from Lancia, and was on his way
home. Seeing the servant, he said with some surprise:

"Where are you off to, Ramon?"

The servant, abashed and frightened, hesitated a few seconds, and then
said:

"To kill the dog."

This reply so astonished the young man that he was dumb with amazement.

"Kill the dog!"

"Yes, señor; the duke gave me the order because he dropped the hare
after catching it."

Gonzalo turned livid.

"How dare he give such a shameless order!" roared the young man, and
snatching the chain so roughly from the servant that he made him
stagger.

Then he strode toward the house, accompanied by the dog, with the
intention of having a violent scene with the duke. But before he reached
home he had time to consider that it would be a breach of hospitality to
quarrel with a guest, and so he contented himself with sending Polion
back to the kennel, and treating the duke somewhat coldly.




CHAPTER XXVI

STORY OF A MANDARIN


After the canine episode the preference shown by the duke for his wife,
and the attentions that he paid her, became as offensive to Gonzalo as
they were at first astonishing, although it still never entered his head
that they went beyond the politeness or gallantry customary in high
society. Besides, the disparity of age between the duke and his wife
seemed to preclude all thoughts of jealousy. Such things only happened
in novels. One day, when he was alone with Cecilia, he suddenly broached
the subject by saying:

"Cecilia, what do you think of the friendship of my wife with the duke?"

The girl looked surprised.

"What do I think of it?" she returned, looking at him with her large,
liquid eyes. "Why, I think that Ventura gets on with him better than the
rest of us here."

"But this partiality, don't you think it makes me look rather
ridiculous?"

"Why?"

"Why, because it does," was the abrupt reply.

Then after a few minutes' silence he added:

"You, Cecilia, do not know how easily a husband can be made ridiculous
when he has such a frivolous, imprudent wife as Ventura!"

"Gonzalo!"

"So imprudent, yes; for you don't notice how pleased she is to talk
aside with him, and how delighted she is when everybody sees her hanging
on his arm! There is no need to say anything, for I know it is sheer
vanity. She has never been anything but vain and frivolous. You know it
yourself, although you won't confess it. But in this case her vanity may
give rise to many grave consequences for me and for everybody. Let her
put on a different dress every day to attract the duke; let her cut her
nails into points, and let her put rouge on her cheeks; let her talk of
Meissonier's pictures without having seen them, and play the fool in
other similar ways; but, my dear girl, those smiles before people and
those asides are intolerable, and if they go on many more days I think I
shall have to put matters right in a way she won't like."

Cecilia tried to calm him down. If he himself confessed that it was all
due to Venturita's frivolous nature, why should he excite himself about
it? Jealousy was ridiculous; nobody in the world could suppose that
Venturita regarded the duke as anything else than what he was--a
married man, and an old one who might very well be her grandfather.

"No, I am not jealous," said the young man somewhat shamefacedly.

"Yes, you are, Gonzalo, although you don't know that you are. This anger
and this excitement, what do they show but jealousy? And look here, my
boy; allow me to say that it is not paying much compliment to yourself,
and still less to your wife, for if you can imagine that Ventura can
prefer this worn-out man to yourself, you credit her with very little
taste."

She blushed as she said these words, and Gonzalo received the sally with
a smile without being convinced. His instinct, which was stronger than
his intelligence, told him that such an aberration was possible.
However, he did not wish to pursue the discussion, because it was
humiliating to press the point, even with his sister-in-law.

He wanted to tell his wife that he strongly objected to the
conversations, confidences, glances, and coquettish smiles she lavished
upon the duke, but he knew Venturita of old, and dreaded speaking to her
himself. One of the biting remarks in which she excelled, or a mocking
retort, easily upset him, and when he was upset like that he did not
know where he was and where to stop.

This was the position of affairs when, the day following his
conversation with Cecilia, he looked in at the Club as usual. Glancing
at the papers on the centre table, his eye fell upon the last number of
"The Youth of Sarrio." He hardly ever read the paper, for although he
was not a party to the antagonistic attitude of his fellow-members, he
was equally averse to the course taken by the Cabin community, and he
avoided seeing the insults leveled at his father-in-law, that made his
blood boil. But on this occasion he cast a careless glance at it, and
stopped to read some of Periquito's verses on the charms of a certain
lady, which made him roar with laughter. Under this effusion there was a
short story with the heading, "_An Uncommon Kind of Husband_" and he
began to peruse it in a perfunctory way:

"A mandarin on his travels was received as the guest of a certain
Chinese plebeian, who placed the best room at his disposal and provided
the best provisions the market could supply in his honor. This Chinaman
had a very beautiful wife who at once attracted the attention of the old
mandarin (for he was old). The mandarin took no heed of the comforts and
the luxurious furniture which the Chinese proudly placed at his
disposal; he had only eyes for the wife of the Chinaman. The house was
frequented by all the friends of the host, who were obsequiously
effusive in smiles, flattery, and genuflections. But the mandarin hardly
condescended to notice them; he had no words for anybody but the wife
of the Chinaman. He was taken to see the town, the chief points of
interest, the picturesque suburbs; it all fell flat: the mandarin was
absorbed in the lady. He was taken to large shooting parties, he was
rowed out on the still blue sea in a beautiful boat, to try his hand at
fishing. But as the mandarin cast his net into the deep he thought he
would rather ensnare his host's lovely wife.

"And while the whole house and neighborhood were alive to the cause of
the mandarin's depression and saw the drift of his attentions, the
husband was quite unsuspicious and calm, and continued to entertain the
mandarin with magnificent banquets and splendid festivities until a
friend whispered in his ear one day: 'Don't you see, silly, that your
guest cares nothing for your entertainments and fishing and shooting
parties? His heart is set upon your beautiful wife.'

"Then the Chinaman, when his eyes were opened, took his wife by the hand
and led her to the mandarin, saying:

"'Pardon, my lord, but I did not notice your depression, nor did I guess
your wishes. If I had guessed them sooner I would have gratified them
ere now. Here, take my wife, oh glorious mandarin.'"

Gonzalo read the columns without seeing the drift of their meaning, but
suddenly it burst upon him, like a flash of lightning, that he was the
subject of the little story. A sudden rush of blood suffused his face
with a fiery hue. He looked around in a quick, shamefaced way. He was
alone. Then with convulsive hands he took up the paper he had let fall
and reread the article for the second, third, and fourth time. The more
he read it the more the fearful suspicion took form in his mind, and it
so overwhelmed him, mentally and physically, that his whole body, with
the exception of his head, grew suddenly icy cold.

The first idea that came to him with returning self-possession was,
"I'll go at once to the office of 'The Youth' and reduce them all to
fragments."

He put on his hat and left the room, but on the staircase another side
of the picture presented itself to him--the great scandal and commotion
he would cause in the town, the laughing-stock he would be in the place,
and how his enemies, or rather those of his father-in-law, would delight
in turning upon him.

He remounted the staircase and returned to the Club to think a minute.
After taking two or three turns up and down the room without knowing if
he were moving or motionless, he altered his mind.

He took the paper, folded it deliberately, put it in his pocket, then
went slowly down the iron staircase, and turned homeward with a slow
step, pale face, and stony glance.

His sense of strength and rage had restored his self-possession.

"Is the señorita in her room?" he asked the servant who opened the door.

"I think so, señor; I will ask the maid."

"No, no; don't ask anybody; I will go myself."

And he went up to the room which they had had since the duke had
occupied the first floor. On passing from the passage he did not notice
Doña Paula, who was sitting near the door, and who was aghast at his
strange expression of countenance. Venturita was standing before the
mirror. On seeing her husband she said, without turning her head:

"Hollo! I thought you had gone out. What is up now?"

Gonzalo drew the paper from his pocket, unfolded it slowly, and handed
it to her, saying:

"This."

"And what is this?" asked the girl in surprise.

"A paper."

"Yes, I see--but what of it?"

"It contains a very interesting little story. Read it. Here in the third
column, underneath these verses."

There were three or four pots of flowers in the room, which had been
used for the portrait that was standing against the wall, waiting to be
hung up in the drawing-room. Gonzalo's eyes grew dark as they fell upon
this picture of his wife, redder than a rose and more golden than a
canary, and with a mystic expression on her face such as he had never
seen.

The duke had talked of sending the portrait to the Salon in Paris. While
Ventura read the paper he kept his eyes fixed upon her face with
breathless attention, but she did not waver under his gaze; she only
grew a little pale as she read the last lines and returned him the
paper.

"Why did you ask me to read that? I don't understand."

"Well, I will explain it to you," returned Gonzalo, accentuating each
syllable in suppressed rage. "I asked you to read this because the
mandarin mentioned in it is the Duke of Tornos, you are the Chinese
lady, and I am the Chinaman--do you understand now?"

At these words he glared at his wife in a terrible way, and crushed up
in his hand a bough of a plant that was standing beside him.

Ventura met the look without wincing, and seemed more surprised than
alarmed; she hesitated for an instant, while her lips moved to reply,
and she ended by bursting into a loud laugh.

"_Ave Maria!_ what an atrocity!"

"I am in earnest, Ventura," returned the young man; "this that excites
your derision is a very serious matter, and your happiness and mine are
at stake."

Ventura only replied by another peal of laughter, and another, until she
bubbled over with laughter, but Gonzalo was not blind to the affectation
of her merriment.

"Take care, Ventura, take care," he said with his face fraught with
fury; "recollect I am speaking seriously now."

"But, my dear fellow--ha! ha!--do you expect me not to laugh when you
tell me--ha! ha!--that you are a Chinaman and I am a Chinese lady?--ha!
ha! ha!" and her laughter grew more affected every minute.

"It is now some days since I ought to have put matters straight,"
continued the husband, gloomily, after a pause. "This unwarranted,
inconvenient, stupid, familiar attitude that you take with the duke
before people irritated me exceedingly--but I wasn't going to expose
myself to ridicule by saying so. Jealous men always look ridiculous--but
you see what has happened by my being too remiss."

So saying, he broke off the branch he was clutching and crushed it in
his hand.

"But you are really jealous now, are you not?" she asked in tones of
mingled cajolery and endearment.

"If I were, I should be silent, Ventura--I should be silent and
watchful; and if my jealousy were well grounded--I learned what to do
before the priest read me Saint Paul's epistles. But there is no
question of jealousy here; the age and position of the duke preclude it,
and I don't insult you by supposing you prefer him to me. The point is,
the ridicule which your imprudence has brought upon me. You don't see,
you stupid girl, that we have the eye of the public upon us; that we
have lots of enemies, and that they seize the smallest pretext to attack
us."

"Well, you acknowledge it is only a pretext to annoy you."

"Yes; but it is founded on your inherent vanity, which I have never been
able to break you of."

"Let us understand each other, Gonzalo. What have I done?" she asked in
an injured tone.

The young man was silent as he looked at her sternly. Then after some
minutes he said slowly:

"You know too well. Repeating it degrades me."

There was another pause of silence, and then Ventura said somewhat
impatiently:

"Well, what do you want?"

"I am going to tell you," returned the young man, restraining himself
with difficulty. "I want this objectionable friendship to cease, as you
see it is most derogatory to me. I want you not to think any more of
the Duke of Tornos, nor to take any notice of his suave smile nor of his
generally compromising flirting manners. I want to resume the calm tenor
of our lives, such as it was before his arrival; and as that is my wish,
I intend to have it done at all costs."

He was silent for a minute, and then, with a vehemence beyond what the
occasion required, he added:

"This very day the duke shall leave the house."

Ventura looked at him in amazement. She turned suddenly livid, and with
her lips trembling with rage she exclaimed:

"What do you mean? You will have to be taken to Leganes. Come, come,"
she added in a more conciliatory tone, "do me the kindness to leave me
in peace, and go and calm yourself, for you really require it."

Gonzalo's face then became distorted with fury, his lips wreathed with
fierce sarcasm, and his eyes flamed.

"Ah!" he roared, more than said, "take the friendship of this rake, for
he is a rake, and all Spain knows it; you think more of it than of your
husband's happiness; but don't think for an instant that because I am
not a duke and a grandee that I don't know how to protect my honor! Look
here! Look here! This is the respect that I have for the duke."

And at these words he gave the picture a kick which leveled it to the
ground with a great noise. Then he seized hold of it, with his teeth
set, his eyes bloodshot, and a prey to one of those paroxysms of rage to
which powerful phlegmatic people are sometimes subject. The canvas was
soon in pieces; and Ventura, utterly dumfounded, but with the daring of
a spoiled woman, gasped out:

"Brute! Brute!"

The tone of this insult was so fierce with rage that Gonzalo raised his
head as if he had been struck with a red-hot iron; and springing upon
her, he seized her by the arm. The girl uttered a cry of agony--her
husband's hand held her with a steel-like grip that went to the very
bone.

"Forgive her, Gonzalo, forgive her!" exclaimed Doña Paula, intervening.

The infuriated man turned his head without loosening his hold of his
wife. At the sight of his mother-in-law, in whose face, now convulsed
with terror, illness had made such cruel ravages, gazing at him with
imploring eyes and hands clasped in entreaty, his hand let go of Ventura
and fell to his side.

He had no time to say anything. Doña Paula, without looking at her
daughter, dragged him by the coat-sleeve, saying:

"Come, my son, come; I will settle this matter, and calm you down."

And Gonzalo, overwhelmed with shame, let himself be taken away like an
automaton. On reaching her room the good lady locked the door.

"I heard all," she said, as she fixed upon him her large, dark eyes, as
sad as those of a Dolorosa, the last remnant of her beauty. "I saw you
cross the passage, looking so strange that I couldn't help following
you. I don't know what it says in this paper that you have given
Venturita, but it must be something very repulsive and objectionable."

"The greatest insult that a man can have!" returned Gonzalo in a stifled
tone.

"How infamous! Insult you, who have never hurt them! You are right. It
is Ventura's fault: her frivolity and the silly ideas that she gets into
her head have caused this trouble, as they have caused other slighter
ones that you have had. But do not imagine for an instant that there is
anything bad about Ventura. She is a giddy creature, a little flirt, but
she is not bad at heart; she will improve with time. I, also, have had
my share of pride, and committed fooleries that put me to shame to think
of now! Oh, years, sadness, and sickness take all the nonsense out of
one! The thing now is to prevent any worse consequences. I have noticed
for some time the duke's attentions, and the intimacy which has sprung
up between them. I know quite well that there is nothing in it; I am as
certain of my daughter as you must be; but I can quite understand that
the conduct of this man is annoying to you. Moreover, when a paper takes
the opportunity of insulting you, it is time matters were put on another
footing; some step must be taken."

"It is come to this," said Gonzalo moodily, "I send the duke out of the
house this very day."

"No, you can not and must not do so; you are quick-tempered, and there
would be a violent scene, which must be avoided."

"But it is precisely this scene that I want!"

"Don't be childish, Gonzalo," replied the lady. "It is for me to settle
this matter, because Rosendo neither sees, hears, nor understands
anything beyond politics. A scandal just now would make you ridiculous."

"Never mind!" exclaimed the young man in a rage. "I want the pleasure of
kicking him out of the house."

"You force me to say, then, Gonzalo," returned Doña Paula in a tone of
impatience tinged with authority, "that you have no right to do so. It
was not you who invited him, neither are you the master of the house."

The young man colored deeply; and noting his confusion the lady added,
in an affectionate tone:

"You are our son, and sons do not interfere in the affairs of their
parents. It is they who have the duty of watching over their happiness
and sacrificing themselves for it. I will see that the duke leaves the
house without any scandal, and without any one suspecting the reason, or
your doing anything which you would regret afterward. Don't think that I
do it for his sake, for I detest him. From the moment the man arrived he
filled me with the greatest repulsion. Now that I see what he has
brought upon our family, you can imagine how I dislike him. I only do it
for your sake, because I love you, I will not say any more than my
daughter--because one's children, oh! one's children! you know what they
are--but, at least as much, and I esteem you much higher."

Gonzalo, quite overcome, dropped into a chair, and began sobbing like a
child, with his face in his hands. The good lady placed her thin, white
hand on his head, and, with tears in her eyes, she said:

"My poor boy! I will set this matter right."




CHAPTER XXVII

A TERM OF PEACE


The Señora de Belinchon descended the iron staircase leading to the
second floor, and, meeting the grandee's valet, she asked:

"What is the señor duke doing?"

"He is painting," replied the servant, looking with surprise and
astonishment at Doña Paula's red eyes.

"Tell him that I wish to speak to him."

While the man went to inform his master, Doña Paula thought her strength
would give way, for she began to feel premonitory symptoms of the spasms
to which she was occasionally subject; but her strong wish to restore
peace to her children overcame her weakness at the moment. Commending
herself to our Lady of Pity, she entered Don Jaime's study, full of
resolution.

The señor, clad in the fantastic garb worn at home in the morning, came
forward to receive her with his palette and brushes in his hand.

"Señora," he said, bowing respectfully and raising the gold-tasseled
Turkish cap that covered his head, "I am sorry you troubled to come up.
A message would have summoned me immediately to your presence."

Doña Paula made a gesture of thanks, putting her hand to her heart,
which was beating at her side like a sledge-hammer. The duke looked at
her in surprise.

"Take a seat, señora," he said, putting his palette and brushes on a
chair.

Whereupon the lady dropped into an armchair, and Don Jaime remained
standing.

"The door must be shut," she said, beginning to rise from her seat; but
the gentleman anticipated her, and then took up his stand in front of
the lady, squaring his feet with exaggerated respect, and waiting for
her to speak.

Several minutes passed in silence, then, raising her sad eyes, she said:

"Señor duke, you have conferred a great honor on us in coming to our
house. We can never sufficiently thank you for this mark of favor--"

The duke bowed as he raised his heavy eyelids to cast upon his
interlocutor a look tinged with curiosity.

"Why do you not sit down?" asked Doña Paula, interrupting her speech.

"I am very comfortable, señora; continue."

But the interruption had upset her; she could not proceed for some
minutes. Finally she murmured:

"It is dreadful!--you do not know, señor duke, what I am going through
now. I wish I were dead!"

And the tears rushing to her eyes, she drew her handkerchief from her
pocket and buried her face in it.

The duke, now quite astonished, said:

"Calm yourself, señora. I am a true friend of both you and De Belichon.
Whatever trouble you may have, let me share it as if it were mine, and I
will do what I can to assuage it."

"Many thanks, many thanks," murmured the lady, without taking her
handkerchief from her eyes; and after a minute's silence she said in a
trembling voice:

"Will you do me a very great favor? A favor for which I will thank you
all the days of my life--but I don't dare ask it?"

"I repeat that I am at your service; and that anything I can do for you,
you may consider done."

"Oh! no, it is outrageous in me! You would never think, señor duke, that
your visit to this house has caused much misery. Your attention and your
admiration of my daughter Ventura's frank, merry disposition have given
rise to remarks in the town."

"Oh!" interrupted the duke, smiling to hide a certain feeling of shame.

"Yes, very offensive remarks about all of us; more especially about my
son-in-law, who is as dear to us as if he were our own son. I do not
blame you or her. I am sure that in your case it has only been due to
overattention, which, in a little place like this, where nothing escapes
notice--Perhaps you, señor, ought not to have--She has been imprudent
and frivolous, she was always faulty in that way--She is a girl with a
will of her own, as one may say--If there were no divisions in the town
there would not be this fearful feud, which is nearly the death of us;
probably nobody would have noticed--Unfortunately our enemies seize on
the most trifling pretext to annoy us and put us to shame--An article
has come out which attacks my son-in-law in such a shameless way--And
this I can not allow--"

Doña Paula's courtesy had diminished with her speech, and the final
words were rapped out defiantly. A slight flush suffused the duke's
affrighted face. He ought, of course, to have seen the gravity of the
situation, but he merely thought: "This person is reading me a lesson."

"I am very sorry," he said in an obsequious tone, "to have caused you
all any trouble. But I am so used to being an object of public comment
and attack that the remarks and articles you have just mentioned don't
annoy me in the slightest. The lower classes always try to pay off the
superiority of the upper ones by finding fault with them. It is the
eternal law of give and take that can not be altered."

"That is all very well, señor duke, for such an exalted personage as
yourself--But we are quite different; we are not in such a high
position, and evil tongues, you must know, can do us a lot of harm,"
returned Doña Paula, so simply that it sounded ironical.

The duke, somewhat irritated, played nervously with the tassel of the
cap he held in his hand, as he said:

"I repeat, I am very sorry, señora. If I had thought that my innocent
attentions to your daughter could have been subjected to such malignant
interpretation, I would have been more careful in proffering them. In
the future I will be more discreet. Lord!" he added, smiling, "how is it
possible to imagine that a man of my years could regard a child like
Ventura in any but a paternal way!"

This remark was supposed to completely exculpate him.

"Oh, señor duke, men in your position are never old. The brilliancy of
it is attractive to women--Therefore, it is not sufficient to be merely
more prudent in the future; the world must be robbed of all pretext for
remarks--"

The duke turned suddenly pale, hesitated a few seconds, and finally
said:

"By my leaving the house, eh?"

"This was the favor I came to beg of you," she said without raising her
eyes, and in a tone of humility.

Don Jaime turned a shade paler, took a turn up and down the room,
crushing the Turkish cap in his clenched hand, uttered a sarcastic
laugh, and returning to his place in front of Doña Paula, he said with
mocking arrogance:

"So you turn me out of the house, señora?"

"I, señor duke? What an idea! The only thing I want is to restore peace
to my children and avoid a catastrophe."

"What catastrophe?" asked the duke, while an ominous light shone in his
dull eyes.

Doña Paula saw it boded danger for her son-in-law, so she hastened to
repair her slip.

"The catastrophe of my son-in-law being insulted by those wretches--Look
here, señor, if you are offended at the request I have just made you
make a great mistake--We are so honored at your coming to our house that
nothing could have flattered us so much as this favor--My husband
exerted himself to prefer the request, and he was delighted when he
heard that you accepted the invitation. You can never understand how
proud I was to have such a distinguished person in my house--I, a woman
of the people, the daughter of a sailor, the granddaughter of a
watchman, known in the place as the Serena, as my mother and
grandmother were before me--certainly I should have been prouder still
if it had been some years ago--one's pride decreases with disillusions
and troubles. But at all events I am very flattered, and only the fear
of the great troubles which may accrue to my children obliges me to take
this step; so you will forgive me, señor."

Don Jaime took another turn across the room, stopped in the centre to
think a minute, and ended by shrugging his shoulders and wreathing his
lips in a scornful way. Then advancing toward Doña Paula, he said:

"Is your husband aware of the step you have just taken?"

"No, señor; and I shall be glad if it could be settled without his
knowledge."

"Perfectly. It shall be done to-day."

"Oh, señor duke! a thousand thanks--You will forgive--" she exclaimed,
rising from her seat and extending her hands to him.

The grandee bowed low without replying.

"I entreat you not to bear me malice."

"The subject of our conversation will remain quite between us. We will
manage to avoid disclosing the reason of my departure. Try to play your
part well. I will answer for my own."

Doña Paula quitted the room, escorted by the duke, who led her to the
door with an exaggerated, silent politeness.

On reaching the staircase the anxious lady, once more alone, breathed
freely. Although it had been at the cost of so many painful emotions,
she was delighted at having arranged the matter without any scandal or
danger. And with a fleet foot she who generally dragged herself about in
ill-health now ran to Gonzalo to tell him the result of her mission.

At luncheon the duke mentioned that he had received a letter from one of
his sons, saying he was coming to spend the month of September with him
in Sarrio; and his brother, the Marques del Riego, would probably also
come. He had therefore decided to take rooms at the hotel. Don Rosendo,
seconded by his wife, immediately strongly opposed the step, while
Gonzalo, with gloomy face and lowered eyes, continued his meal in
silence during the discussion.

In spite of all Don Rosendo's arguments to make him stay, even
representing that the house was large enough to receive the new guests,
the sorrow which his whole family would feel at this unexpected
departure, etc., etc., the duke was obdurate, although he responded with
his usual patronizing smile, and a flow of pleasant, friendly phrases.
At last it was seen that persuasion was useless, and the depressed Don
Rosendo accompanied the duke and his secretary on the inspection of the
rooms at the only decent hotel the town possessed. The first floor was
taken, and on the following day the duke moved into it, in spite of his
host's urgent entreaties that he would at least stay until the arrival
of his relatives.

The whole place was taken by surprise at the move, and eagerly inquired
the cause. But although Don Rosendo gave everybody a full account of the
whole occurrence, it was impossible to prevent people suspecting that
things had not been just as they were told by Belinchon. His enemies
were particularly active in unraveling the mystery, thinking, not
without reason, that the Club party would not have the duke's influence
to oppose them. During the two months and more of the grandee's
residence in Sarrio, the friends of Don Rosendo had successfully brought
into court an indictment against the mayor; the administrator of the
posts, who was of the Cabin party, had been withdrawn, and the problem
of the slaughter-house had been solved according to Belinchon's opinion.

Maza's friends, who had been going about like doomed flies in autumn,
received the fresh news like a tardy ray of sunlight. Holy Heavens! what
excited talk took place that night in the Cabin! Joy shone in all their
eyes, their nostrils dilated with delight as they anticipated the fall
of the Club party and a decisive, a grand victory for themselves. "The
Youth of Sarrio" published in its next number the following laconic but
venomous paragraph:

"His excellency, the Señor Duke of Tornos, who was the guest of Don
Rosendo Belinchon, has moved to the first floor apartments of the
Estella Hotel. We offer the honored duke our sincerest congratulations."

This disgraceful notice made Belinchon ill for days, and then he sent
his seconds to Maza. But the mayor returned that they could not fight
while he was in office, but when that was over he would see if he could
not cross swords with such a blusterer. Then the seconds replying in a
similar tone, they were threatened with imprisonment and had to retire.

The Duke of Tornos continued visiting Don Rosendo's house occasionally,
and Belinchon and his friends always accompanied him when he went out.
The friendship between them remained outwardly the same. The small
neutral party in Sarrio thought that there was no mystery in his move,
and that it all originated in the ridiculous imaginations of the Cabin
party, who were blinded by the desire to get the better of their
adversaries. However, some days had elapsed, and September had come in
without bringing the advent of either the grandee's son or brother. The
duke himself had so much improved in health in Sarrio that he had his
carriage and horses brought from Madrid, and bought a charming little
fishing-boat. He seemed disposed to spend some months in Sarrio. In his
exterior relations with the Belinchon family--that is to say, when he
met them in the town--he assumed a courteous, kind manner befitting
people deserving much attention. He did not take such a familiar tone
with Venturita as before, but he chatted with her in the theatre and at
the Promenade in a playful way. Thus those who pried into the reason of
his leaving the house were put off the scent. Doña Paula was very
pleased at this behavior, and Gonzalo even, seeing that he could not
expect more, was courteous and polite to him.

Peace reigned again between the young couple. Venturita after a few
days, during which she looked pale and cross, and exchanged no word with
her husband, doubtless being hurt by the violence he had shown in the
scene described, resumed her usual demeanor--merry and pleasant
sometimes, cross and capricious at others, and always ready with a
sharp, sarcastic remark. Nevertheless, Gonzalo noticed an unaccustomed
amiability and deference in her manner, and he attributed it to her
desire to blot out the recollection of that transient but perilous
trouble they had undergone.

So the days drifted quietly by in Don Rosendo's house, only disturbed by
Doña Paula's attacks of illness. She was as often in bed as up, but she
took long drives with Cecilia, or Ventura, and often had her grandchild
Cecilita, whom she worshiped, with her. Don Rufo talked of the necessity
of her moving to another climate, to a place above the level of the sea,
where the air would be clearer, and Don Rosendo, although possessed with
the desire of exterminating his enemies and conferring happiness on his
natal town, entertained the idea of moving, albeit with some repugnance,
and amused himself by weaving vague grand utilitarian plans as usual. He
was inspired with the happy notion of transferring "The Light of Sarrio"
to Madrid, and making it a daily paper under the title of "The Light of
the Provinces," to defend the moral and material interests of the
provinces; to maintain their autonomic life independent and free in face
of the monopolizing action and power of the capital, "a raging fire that
dries up the sap of the nation and devours her inherited wealth." What a
great and noble thought!

At the end of October Gonzalo went to Lancia on business for his
father-in-law. It was a question of persuading a banker of the town not
to proceed with certain negotiations with a capitalist in Sarrio, a
certain member of the Cabin, according to report; anyhow, he was to let
Don Rosendo have the refusal of the offer in question on the same terms.

Gonzalo had been away two days. At dusk on the afternoon of the third
day Doña Paula thought she would go up and see Ventura, who had
returned to the second floor after the duke's departure. The good lady
very rarely ascended that iron staircase. But that day she felt
stronger, she had less pain in her side, and she wanted to try her
strength and prove to herself how much better she was. The immediate
object of her visit was to take her little granddaughter Cecilita a doll
which the maid had just finished dressing. The stairs seemed very high.
When she was half-way up she stopped to take breath, and on reaching the
landing she called as loudly as she could:

"Cecilita, my child, where are you?"

"Here, grandma, here," returned the child, coming out of her mother's
room.

She was a little creature, not yet three years old, with sunny golden
hair, and so spontaneous in her baby talk that her grandmother quite
adored her.

"What have you got for me, grandma? What have you got for me?" she
asked, looking eagerly at Doña Paula, after having nearly knocked her
over in the impetuous way she caught her by the legs.

"The doll, my child, with its new frock."

"No doll--the doll for Lalina--I'se big--I want chocolate."

"I have no chocolate here, my darling," replied the grandmother, looking
lovingly at the child.

"Mama has chocolates--come and give me one."

And the little girl dragged her grandmother by the dress to her mother's
room. On entering it the child seemed surprised, and looked about
everywhere, while Ventura came forward and embraced her mother
affectionately.

"My goodness! what a surprise! whatever brought you here? I don't know
that it is good for you to come upstairs like this. Do you feel all
right?"

"I am not very tired. I think I am better. Dehand's pills seem to do me
good."

"That's right. I am glad we have at last hit upon a medicine that does
some good. Won't you sit down?"

"Grandma, give me a chocolate," said the child, interrupting them.

"I haven't any, my dear. Have you any caramels, Ventura?"

"No."

"Jaime has some, and he is here."

Venturita turned dreadfully pale.

"What Jaime, child?" asked Doña Paula.

"Nobody, nobody; some nonsense. Well, these pills suit you, then?
Suppose Don Rufo heard of it. Suppose he heard of it!" Ventura repeated
in such a trembling voice and looking so confused that her mother gazed
at her in astonishment.

"Jaime is here--he has chocolate; come and see, grandma."

Whereupon the child dragged Doña Paula by the dress, and the lady,
vaguely apprehending something terrible, let herself be led without
knowing what she was doing.

"Cecilia!" cried Ventura in a voice unlike that ever heard by her
mother.

However, the child paid no heed, and went on dragging her grandmother
toward the bedroom. But before they reached the door the Duke of Tornos
appeared on the threshold.

At the sight of the sudden apparition Doña Paula stood rooted to the
spot, with her face white and terrified and her eyes staring in
amazement. Then she fell heavily to the floor, dragging the child with
her.

The duke hastened to raise her, and then, obedient to an imperious
gesture of Ventura, he laid her on the sofa and took his departure.

The cries of the girl soon brought up the servants and her sister. It
was thought it was a faint brought on by overfatigue. She was carried to
her room, where, thanks to Cecilia's care, she recovered consciousness,
but not her faculty of speech. The unhappy lady was powerless to
articulate a word. Two days went by, and the efforts of both Don Rufo
and another doctor who came from Lancia were powerless to restore action
to the paralyzed tongue.

She generally lay with her eyes shut, while soft sighs escaped her
lips; but when Venturita entered the room she opened her eyes, and fixed
them on her with an expression full of anguish and reproach.

Two days later, and almost at the same hour in which the fatal scene had
taken place, the unhappy lady expired, with her grief-stricken eyes
still fixed on Venturita's face, even in the hour of death.




CHAPTER XXVIII

GONZALO BECOMES MAYOR


The Belinchon family retired to Tejada to mourn their bereavement in
seclusion for some time.

Doña Paula was mourned, as she deserved to be, by her magnanimous
husband, who, waiving his ideas of progress and reform, was not remiss
in showing signs of grief and affection, which, in my opinion, in no
wise detracted from his public dignity.

It was long before Cecilia ceased to mourn the loss of her mother, to
whom she had been bound as much by ties of sympathy as of blood. She was
more like Doña Paula than any other of the children, although she had
not been the favorite. Pablo, the pet, felt it as much as he was capable
of feeling anything; but, according to report, in a few days he was seen
at full trot on his last purchase in horseflesh, so he could not be said
to mourn very deeply.

But it was particularly on Venturita that the sudden death had a sad and
strange effect. She was so overcome that she was for some days in bed
in a high fever. When she recovered she looked pale and sad, replied
abstractedly when she was spoken to, and in spite of her husband's
entreaties she rarely left her room. This grief, as great as it was
unexpected, was a proof to Gonzalo of the truth of Cecilia and Doña
Paula's continual assertions that Venturita might be wild, capricious,
and vain, but she had a good heart. This was a great alleviation to the
sincere sorrow he felt at the death of his mother-in-law, for the final
and maternal service she rendered him had put the seal to the affection
with which her constant kindness had inspired him.

The Duke of Tornos returned to Madrid shortly after his friend's
affliction.

From thence he corresponded with Don Rosendo, and frequently did him a
good turn in the ceaseless feud that he maintained against his enemies
of the Cabin.

These services were finally crowned by the Grand Cross of Isabel the
Catholic. The grandee forwarded with the diploma the Order set in
diamonds worth not less than 20,000 reales.

Don Rosendo's gratitude and emotion on the receipt of the great mark of
honor can be imagined. As nobody in Sarrio owned the Grand Cross, he had
to go to Lancia for a knight of the Order to complete the honor by
decorating him with it.

And now that he was a knight, he who had professed a certain
metaphysical scorn for all religious observances now joined in the
procession of the parish, so as to carry a light, with the Order on his
breast and the ribbon across his frock coat.

All this was gall and wormwood to Maza's party, and their spite thereat
was let off not only at the Cabin, but in the periodical, in which the
famous founder of "The Light of Sarrio" was made the subject of both
comic and serious attacks.

In some of the fierce and caustic paragraphs one could almost see the
bilious mayor, pen in hand.

For the first time in his life Don Rosendo read the diatribes with no
sensation beyond that of infinite scorn. When the apogee of society is
reached, attacks from pygmies seem more curious than offensive. The
event roused Venturita from her lethargic, gloomy state. One of her
dreams had been realized, and she participated in the pride and glory of
her father, even to appearing sometimes in the town, but, of course,
always in the carriage.

She adopted a haughtier mien, and her languid, grand, ladylike air made
all the ladies of the town nearly die of envy, although they avenged
themselves for her contemptuous manners by calling her, in their hours
of spleen, "The Codfish Princess."

The death of her mother, whom everybody had known "with the
handkerchief tied behind," as they say, had contributed as much as the
Grand Cross of her father to raise the social status of the family, or
rather to make it aristocratic.

Venturita, with her scornful demeanor, her costly costumes, and the
disdainful coolness with which she treated her acquaintances,
effectually avenged the poor woman who had been made to undergo such a
lifelong mortification at the hands of the ladies of Sarrio.

The winter passed away at Tejada--a winter unusually inclement.
Sometimes it rained a great deal, which made it impossible to leave the
house; at other times there was a severe frost; the sky was clear, but
in the mornings the fields looked white with a coating of frost half an
inch thick. All these meteorological phenomena hold charms for those who
love the country. Gonzalo was born to revel in these fluctuations of
Nature. If it froze, he rose early in the morning and, to the
astonishment of the household, he went out into the corridor, where he
washed himself with the water which he had brought from the marble
fountain basin after breaking the ice. Then, donning a light shooting
suit, he took his gun and went off on one of his wonderfully long walks
of sixteen or eighteen miles, without any one hearing him complain of
fatigue afterward.

If it snowed, he put on his waterproof, his high boots, and his fur
cap, and went shooting wild pigeons or hares about the estate. More than
once he fell into one of the reservoirs filled with snow, and it was
only through his extraordinary strength that he managed to get out. And
then the country offered other pleasures unknown in town. The groups of
trees and bushes were pleasant to the eye; the dark green of the
conifera looked clear and bright with the collection of water on their
branches, which the frost soon solidified; the leaves of the magnolias
shone like crystals, and both the face and coloring of Nature were
incessant in their changes, and the forms of the trees and the mountains
were also subject to endless variations.

Even the monotonous pattering of the rain upon the foliage gave a
pleasant, reposeful feeling quite luxurious to those who had nothing to
do out of doors, and who had within all the comforts and luxuries of the
rich. It was pleasant to hear the chirping of the sparrows, who resorted
by hundreds to a large Washingtonia near the house as if it were a great
aviary. It was amusing to Gonzalo to feed the little exotic creatures
that Don Rosendo had on his property after walking over to the cages in
wooden shoes, and it was also delightful to doze in an armchair by the
fireside with a cigar in his mouth and a bottle of rum by his side,
while Cecilia read aloud either an interesting story or some harmonious,
sonorous poetry.

Don Rosendo and Pablo went regularly every day to Sarrio, and came back
to dinner. Don Rosendo occupied himself in directing public opinion
along the path of progress, both moral and material, and in crushing
those "reptiles who grovel in the mud because they are incapable of
rising to the high regions of ideas, and then eject their venom on every
one superior to them in intelligence or virtue"--it is unnecessary to
mention the names of "those reptiles" alluded to in his articles so
frequently by Don Rosendo--and Pablo was engaged in laying siege to the
hearts of several fair strangers who had arrived in the town.

One morning he went out shooting with his brother-in-law, but finding
that the cold spoiled his complexion, he gave up the sport almost
entirely. Besides, Piscis greatly objected to it, for a clever centaur
like him cared for nothing on earth but horses.

In the afternoon, when it rained, Ventura played _tresillo_ with Cecilia
and Gonzalo if she were in a good humor, and if not, the two latter
played _tute_ together, with a child seated on the lap of each; and
although the little girls upset the game every moment by taking up a
card in their tiny hands, the players were so good-tempered that they
merely took them gently from them.

"Be quiet, Cecilita, be quiet; if you show your aunt my cards she will
win."

"Never mind, auntie dear, look at them," said the child, laughing. When
the game was over the elders watched the children make houses with the
cards, while the raindrops pattered on the Chinese windows and the logs
of wood crackled on the hearth. The children had their meals with the
family, and attending to them was an important occupation to Cecilia,
for she had to serve them, to tie their bibs on, give them water, and
see that they did not drop their food. When Gonzalo was at home he
delighted in assisting at this repast and standing like a butler behind
the chairs of his children. Then when they had to be taken up to bed,
Cecilia took one in her arms, and Gonzalo the other, and they carried
them to the room where they both slept. The task of undressing them was
long and complicated. Gonzalo, in spite of his ox-like strength, was as
gentle as a woman in untying their strings and moving their little
bodies from one side to another without hurting them. Sometimes the
hands of the brother and sister-in-law touched each other; then a slight
cloud overshadowed her smiling face, but Gonzalo noticed nothing. When
the little ones were in bed, they smilingly listened to the innocent
prayers which Cecilita said to "auntie." Paulina did not yet know how to
address the Supreme Being, and so she only made the sign of the cross.
While they were going to sleep, papa and auntie had to remain close by
the bedside without moving. If they talked together, the children were
disturbed, and were a long time getting to sleep. Therefore they tried
to keep silent, or they only exchanged a few words in low voices.

Cecilita could not sleep without holding one of her aunt's ears. Gonzalo
often objected to this fancy, and every day he spoke of making her give
it up; but his sister-in-law did not mind it, and she even bent over the
pillow to indulge it. Sometimes Gonzalo fell asleep on Paulina's pillow,
especially when he had been out shooting, and on waking up he found
himself close to the sweet, pale face of his sister-in-law, whose
wide-open eyes were fixed on space.

"What are you thinking about, bag of bones?" he asked her as his eyes
met hers.

The girl collected herself with an effort, and smiled kindly.

"I don't know--nothing."

"Haven't you a lover?" he said one evening, raising her chin
affectionately.

"Bah! what lovers could I have in this place?" said Cecilia, coloring,
and withdrawing her face.

"You could have one in Sarrio."

"And he can't care much not to come and see me all the months that we
have been here. I have already told you that I am going to remain an old
maid," she added with a smile.

"That can't be," replied the young man with fervor; "it can't be. It
would be a shame to poor humanity for you to remain an old maid. You
were born to be married. Your chief delights are in managing the house,
looking after children, sewing and dusting. You will be a perfect wife,
like Luis de Leon describes. It is intolerable to think of any one who
could make any man happy remaining an old maid."

We do not know what Cecilia's thoughts were just then; but they were
probably something like this: "Yes; I could have made any man happy but
you."

She opened her lips with a gesture of indifference, and replied:

"What has that to do with it? All women who are not pretty have these
qualities. Those who shine in the world think of their clothes, and they
are right."

There was a sad, despairing irony in these words which Gonzalo could not
but feel in his heart.

"Oh! you always talk this nonsense. I believe you put on this modesty to
be contradicted--besides, we know that you can shine with the first. You
have eyes that are unequaled; you are graceful, elegant, even of
distinguished bearing. What do you want more, bag of bones? The thing
is, señorita, you have more here than here." And he put his finger first
on his forehead, and then on his heart. "When somebody comes along who
really interests you, you will see how all these ideas about celibacy
will disappear."

Cecilia shrugged her shoulders and resumed her far-away look as she
dropped the conversation.

With the month of April the family returned to Sarrio.

The municipal elections took place in June, and Gonzalo was elected town
councilor against his will. Don Rosendo imposed the sacrifice upon him.

Ventura regained her spirits with the approach of summer. She went out
more frequently, and her open carriage always created a certain
sensation. The fact was, it was very grand with its trappings from
Paris. She liked to dress in black, for in her vanity she knew that it
enhanced the brilliancy of her complexion, and brought out the golden
hue of her hair. When she went to the eleven o'clock mass, which was the
most crowded service, her presence excited a repressed murmur of
curiosity among the women and of admiration among the men. The
princess-like air that exasperated the ladies was what delighted the
men. They all agreed that her beauty, elegance, and distinguished
manners made her far superior to the other young women in the town, and
would create quite a sensation in more aristocratic circles. Ventura had
been of the same opinion for some time, and she turned over in her head
the idea of going to live in Madrid.

When she suggested it to her husband he expressed a great objection to
the plan; he was not a man for the court; the social duties imposed by
etiquette would be distasteful to him, for he was born for liberty, the
enjoyment of the open air and sea, bodily exercise, and easy homely
occupations. Besides, he was quite aware that the income upon which they
lived among the first people in Sarrio would not be sufficient to keep
them on the same social plane in Madrid, particularly with his wife's
disposition. Nevertheless, Venturita was so sure of overcoming these
objections that she ceased speaking of the project, but kept on thinking
of the time and means of its fulfilment.

An event then occurred to disturb the life of the Belinchon family.
Gonzalo was unexpectedly elected mayor of Sarrio through the influence
of the Duke of Tornos. His first idea was to decline the appointment
with some excuse, but Don Rosendo and all his friends were so eager and
hot about his accepting it that he could not avoid doing so. The members
of the Club were somewhat upset about it; they considered they were put
upon, for the new mayor would never allow the foundations of their
enemies' houses to be laid bare, as Maza did, neither would he resort to
any other extreme measure of their suggesting.

In the month of September, when the bathing season was over which filled
the town with guests, and shooting began in the country, Gonzalo
returned with his family to Tejada. The children were very well there,
and he always liked it; besides, there was not much going on just then
in Sarrio. His office of mayor somewhat stood in the way of this move,
but he arranged with his municipal colleagues to go to town every day,
or at least very frequently. The journey could be made in a carriage in
less than half an hour. Moreover, Don Rosendo kept his house open, so
that Gonzalo could dine and sleep there as often as he liked.

As Venturita was thinking of going to Madrid the next spring, she made
no objection to these plans of her husband; and he was glad to have made
this arrangement when he found that the Duke of Tornos was coming in
October, for life in Madrid had brought a recurrence of the malady which
the air of Sarrio had benefited. Unwilling as he would have been to
confess it, Gonzalo still felt the sting of jealousy in the inmost
depths of his heart, and neither reflection nor specious argument with
himself could eradicate it.

While the duke was away he was free from that feeling, but the news of
his approaching arrival was a vexation to him, if not an actual trouble.
And in effect, at the end of October there was no escape from going to
meet him at Lancia with his father-in-law and several gentlemen, all
members of the Club. The mayor's appointment through his influence made
the grandee a powerful patron of the party. He put up at the Estella
Hotel with his secretary, and began the outdoor life which he said, with
truth, suited him so well. Several fine days he went out fishing, or
walking, or shooting, or riding. This time he only brought two horses
with him: one for a tilbury, and a magnificent saddle one; so when the
secretary rode, he used a horse that Don Rosendo put at his disposal.

The duke maintained cordial relations with the Belinchon family, but he
had only been to Tejada three times in a fortnight. As Ventura and
Cecilia frequently came to Sarrio, he saw them and talked to them,
although he avoided being with them in public.

After the duke's arrival Gonzalo assiduously read "The Youth of Sarrio,"
which now like "The Light" came out three times a week. He read it to
soothe the uneasiness which he felt, because he was in continual fear of
some insulting paragraph like that which enraged him so much the
previous summer. In the first numbers after the grandee arrived, "The
Youth" contented itself with showing its hostility toward the duke by
making fun of him under such transparent nicknames as those of
"painter," "fisher," and even "politician," and insinuating the idea
that the duke was a person despised in Madrid, dismissed from court,
and without influence with the Government. Some stories of his life were
brought to light which were not much to his credit; and even his habits
about his clothes and cravats were made fun of. Don Jaime did not read
such an obscure journal; but when Peña showed him what was said about
him he smiled maliciously, and wrote to the governor of the province
asking him to take the first opportunity of suppressing the paper. The
Club party hearing of this letter, joyfully anticipated the blow.




CHAPTER XXIX

A WOMAN'S SACRIFICE FOR HER BROTHER-IN-LAW


At last the poisoned arrow so much dreaded by Gonzalo pierced his heart;
it was not a paragraph, it was a story, supposed to have taken place in
Scotland, in which he, his wife, Don Rosendo, and other well-known
people were made atrocious objects of ridicule. Among other things, it
was said that while the sheriff (evidently Gonzalo) was assiduously
fulfilling the duties of his office, Lord Trollope (the duke) undertook
for him the duties of husband to his beautiful wife.

Gonzalo felt the same sense of rage and misery as before; but this time
he decided to control himself and find out if there were any truth in
the malignant insinuation, and if unfortunately there should be, he
would take full and complete revenge.

It cost him great trouble to hide the feelings which preyed upon him,
unaccustomed as he was to dissimulation, but he was greatly helped by
his strong desire to put an end to his doubts. The only thing noticeable
about him was that he seemed rather sad and preoccupied. He devoted
himself for some days to watching his wife, never losing sight of her
for an instant; but he discovered nothing to confirm his suspicions. At
the same time, he watched to see if and how the duke might have access
to her. The result of his investigations was that he found that this
could only be the case when he went to the municipal sessions. This was
impossible by day, as the duke was not a person who could go unobserved;
it must then be in the hours of the night when he slept in town.

He determined to know the truth at once. To that end he announced to his
family a few days in advance that a meeting of the Town Council would
oblige him to sleep in Sarrio on Friday, for the meeting was an
important one, as it was to decide nothing less than the appointment of
one of the two doctors of the place, paid by the municipal corporation.

The Maza party had their candidate, and that of Don Rosendo theirs, and
the contention was most bitter, not about the votes, which had been
perfectly counted the previous day, but because the Cabin party, who had
been defeated, had prepared a petition to Parliament to nullify the
election of the enemies' candidate, by saying he had not had the months
of practise considered necessary by the corporation to make the
candidate eligible. The day of the great test found Gonzalo very upset.
He had craftily tried to find out if any servant of the house was a
party to the matter, or at least if he knew anything; but he found out
nothing which could make him think so. He breakfasted without appetite,
and after swallowing his coffee he went off with his father-in-law. The
meeting of the Town Council lasted till ten o'clock at night. Then he
went home with Don Rosendo, who noticed that his son-in-law was
preoccupied and abstracted. Gonzalo excused himself by saying that he
was much irritated by the spleen and behavior of Maza's friends. They
retired to rest at eleven o'clock, and then, when all was silent, our
young man secretly left the house, and took the road to Tejada on foot.

The night was cloudy, but not very dark; the light of the moon shone
through the clouds, revealing objects at a short distance off. Gonzalo
walked swiftly, with a thick sword-stick in his hand, and carrying a
pistol in his pocket.

He felt very sad, and the test he was about to make filled him with
mingled fear and remorse. If his wife were guilty, what a tragedy was at
hand! And if she were not, he was acting a low part to suspect her
honor. He continued his course as furtively as if he were a robber about
to break into a house, hiding under the walls along the road when he
heard steps, and trembling when he heard a voice, far off as it might
be. The idea that an acquaintance might see him on foot at that time
made him ashamed, feeling quite certain that his object would be
guessed.

The fresh air seemed to pierce his very bones, although he so rarely
felt cold. There was a soft, melancholy sound from the rustling of the
wind in the tops of the trees which lined the road like black phantoms.
Under one of these he thought he saw a figure, and, fearing to meet
anybody who might know him, he jumped into the field; but, looking over
the little wall, all that he saw was ruminating and recumbent cows. Then
passing a workman's cottage, a window was suddenly thrown open and a
woman appeared, which made him take to his heels under the shadow of the
trees. As he proceeded on his way he felt a weight at his heart, and a
thousand different ideas warred in his mind. He recollected the many
delightful details of the first months of his married life: the sweet
words and the ostensible proofs of love given him by his wife--his wife
whose defects were those of all girls who are too much spoiled--and he
began to think that he must be under some cursed hallucination, one of
the thousand infamies invented by the enemies of his father-in-law to
injure him, and he was on the point of returning to Sarrio and going
back to bed when, on thinking over and weighing his grounds for
suspicion, the recollection of the duke's departure from the house of
his wife's parents, Ventura's frivolity and flirtations and the veiled
yet persistent attack of the inimical journal, fired his blood and urged
on his steps. Oh! shame on them if it were true! Better for them if they
had never been born! And his hand tightening on the stick, he drew out
the sword to make sure it was ready for use. The revolver did not
suggest itself to him; he wanted to see and feast his eyes on the blood
of the traitors.

When he had covered half the distance to Tejada he suddenly heard behind
him the gallop of a horse. Without knowing why, his heart gave a
terrible jump, and he quickly leaped into the adjoining fields and
anxiously waited, looking over the wall, for the horse to pass by.
Before two minutes were over it went by like a flash. He was perfectly
able to recognize the duke's chestnut steed; he could not distinguish
the grandee himself, as he was enveloped in a cloak, with a large hat
drawn over his face; but if his eyes did not see him, his heart saw him
with perfect clearness. He stood stunned, rooted to the ground, and he
felt a peculiar failing of the legs as if they were going to give way.
But the blood soon resumed its healthy circulation in his athletic
frame, his iron muscles quickly reasserted their strength, and, without
touching it with his hands, he cleared the six-foot wall which enclosed
the field. He sprang into the middle of the road, and without an
instant's delay he pursued the horse at a mad, wild speed as if he were
silly enough to try and catch up to it. Although he was long-winded, he
was out of breath long before he reached the estate, and he had to stop
three or four times to recover himself. At last he arrived at the
shrubbery and entered by the iron gate, which was only latched. Casting
a glance round, he saw the duke's horse tied to a tree. He hastily
continued his course, carefully avoiding making any noise, by one of the
paths lined with coniferas leading to the house, and, as he knew all the
approaches, he did not go to the door--of which he had the key with
him--for fear that some servant would hear him, but he climbed by a vine
up to the window of his father-in-law's room, which was always left open
when he did not sleep at home. Unfortunately, it happened to be closed.
Then he drew out his sword, and, putting it in the crack of the window,
he raised the latch and thus effected an entrance.

He was, however, seen by one person--Cecilia. On one of the preceding
nights she, occupying a room next to that of her sister, thought she
heard a noise, and got up. She looked through the window toward the
garden and saw Pachin, the servant, with another man she could not
recognize. Nevertheless, an awful suspicion filled her with horror. The
gait of the man, of whom she could only see the figure, was not that of
a peasant. Gonzalo was sleeping that night at Sarrio; besides, her
brother-in-law was much taller. Dreadfully upset by a terrible idea, she
retired to rest again, but not to sleep. All the following day she was
sad and preoccupied, and she inwardly determined to watch her sister to
know for certain if her thoughts were chimerical or real. So she kept
her eye on Pachin, and she noticed that on the very day that Gonzalo was
to sleep at Sarrio he was given a commission by Ventura, although he was
not the one to make the house purchases. When he returned she wanted to
see what he had brought. It was a French novel, which she could not take
into her hand, as Ventura seized hold of it and went off to her room.
She then had no doubt but that there was a letter between the leaves,
and she determined to watch that night and ascertain the truth.

After dinner she sat sewing, while Ventura read by the light of the
lamp; and when it struck ten both sisters retired to their respective
rooms.

Cecilia threw a cloak over her shoulders, put out the light, and sat by
the window. She waited--one, two hours. When it was nearly twelve, she
noticed two shadows among the trees, and, albeit with difficulty, she
recognized Pachin and the man of the previous night, whom she now saw
was the duke.

The two shadows quickly disappeared among the trees round the house. She
stood petrified with horror; a wave of indignation rose in her heart
and burst from her lips in the words:

"How infamous! How infamous!"

Then she seated herself on the window-sill, with her face pressed
against the pane, as overwhelmed with confusion, shame, and distress as
if she were the culprit. At the end of some minutes, standing with her
terrified gaze fixed on the park, she saw another figure running with
strange swiftness toward the house. She could not repress a cry of
horror, and sprang to her feet as if she were worked by a spring; then
stumbling in the dark through the furniture, she reached her sister's
room, but it was all in darkness. For a moment she thought of calling
her, but then she recollected that Ventura could not sin so close to her
and her children. A few steps further, on turning the corner of a
passage, she saw a light, and ran toward it. In the Persian chamber, of
rotunda form, somewhat isolated from the rest of the house, there was a
light; and she gave two little knocks at the door, saying through the
keyhole:

"It is I, Ventura. Open! Gonzalo is here."

The door was then opened, and Ventura appeared, paler than death. The
Duke of Tornos was at the other end of the room, and was turning to the
window, with intent to jump out of it. But Cecilia ran toward him, and
catching him by the arms, she cried:

"No, not that! It will be no use--Ventura, escape--To the kitchen!
Gonzalo climbed up by papa's room."

The girl spoke in an imperious falsetto tone, with her eyes flaming.

Ventura required no repetition; for she precipitately left the room.

Then Cecilia forcibly dragged the duke to one of the sofas, and said:

"Sit down."

The magnate looked at her in stupefaction, and asked:

"Why?"

"Sit down, I tell you," said the girl in a fury, and at the same time
putting her hands on his shoulders she pushed him down.

The duke at last sat down, and then Cecilia placed herself on his knees,
and, throwing her arms around his neck, she put her lips on his cheek.

At that moment quick steps were heard in the corridor, the door was
violently thrown open, and Gonzalo appeared with his drawn sword-stick.
Cecilia, turning her head, uttered a cry; and the young man recognizing
his sister-in-law, sheathed the arm which he carried, and, hastily
reopening the door, he repaired in surprise and confusion to his old
bridal chamber.

There Ventura was quietly reading by the light of a lamp. On seeing her
husband before her she rose in surprise, saying:

"What is it? How is it you are here?"

An actress would gladly have bought from her that movement and tone of
voice.

Gonzalo was taken aback, and knew not what to say; but he got out of the
difficulty by exclaiming:

"Don't you know what scandal is going on in the house?"

"What is going on?" returned the girl, with a face so discomposed that
if Gonzalo had been more observant by nature he would have seen that it
could not have been solely due to his presence. He shut the door, and
said in her ear:

"Your sister is in the Persian chamber with the duke! Don't you know
anything about it? Tell the truth," he added, seizing her by the wrist.

Ventura was confounded; she hesitated; she trembled; she lowered her
eyes admirably well, and finally said:

"Why should you want me to know, Gonzalo?"

"Don't lie, Ventura!" he exclaimed with a furious gesture; but his heart
was filled with immense and infinite relief.

"I am telling you the truth--I know nothing about it--but I suspected
something. That is why I was alarmed. When you came in I was thinking
of going to Cecilia's room to see if she were there."

"How shameful! How scandalous! But this infamy! Some course must be
taken--this must be put an end to without anybody hearing of it."

"Yes, yes; but what do you want us to do?"

"I don't know. I will speak to your father--No, not to your father--it
would be a fearful blow to the poor man. I will speak to the duke, and
we'll see if he resists!"

At that moment they heard a noise in the adjoining room.

"Cecilia has gone to her room," said Ventura. "I will go now and speak
to her myself. It will all be put a stop to, and remain a secret. I
don't wish you to compromise yourself, Gonzalo mine," she added,
throwing her arms around his neck. Gonzalo made a gesture of scorn.

"No, no; I don't want to. It is better for me to speak to Cecilia--wait
a minute."

Her husband stopped her as she was leaving the room, and said in a low
voice:

"Don't speak cruelly to her. Try and be prudent. It is infamous of him
to have thus abused his friendship with the family. What a wretched
creature!"

Ventura left the room, and repaired to that of her sister, trembling
with alarm. The heroic girl was standing in the middle of the room, with
her arms by her side and her eyes fixed on the ground. Ventura
carefully closed the door, and embracing her, she murmured in a
tremulous voice:

"Oh, my sister! thank you, thank you!"

But Cecilia roughly repulsed her with a gesture of scornful pride,
exclaiming:

"I did it for him, and not for you!"




CHAPTER XXX

A FANCY DRESS BALL AT SARRIO


Cecilia would never do it again--she saw the wickedness of her conduct;
she was sorry to have given Gonzalo's enemies ground for insulting his
wife's honor, and she had given her word, and solemnly sworn, that those
nocturnal meetings would not occur again.

Such was the message that Ventura delivered that night to her husband.

During the succeeding days he showed neither anger nor even severity
against the delinquent. All his anger and ill-will were against the
duke, whom he accused of having iniquitously abused the confidence of
his father-in-law to arouse in poor Cecilia feelings that had hitherto
lain dormant. He treated her with kindness, even to indulgence, such as
he might have accorded a sick child in the desire to show her that she
had lost none of his affection.

But this kindness was so humiliating to her, showing as it did that the
man was quite contented in his conviction of her guilt, that she
repulsed it, and in spite of her strenuous efforts to do so she failed
to appear grateful for so much generosity.

She shut herself up in her room, without attending as before to the care
of the children, and at meal-times she looked so grave and was so quiet
that Don Rosendo's notice was attracted, absorbed as the great patrician
was in the higher sphere of the battle of thought which was now being
waged in Sarrio.

And with his peculiar perspicacity he saw that it was a question of
moral and physical weakness proceeding from the monotonous country life.
Youth has its own needs, and these must be attended to.

"You are ill, Cecilia. You look pale and sad. You must leave here and
live a freer life, in surroundings more befitting young people. We will
go to Madrid for a couple of months in the spring. In the country you
get asphyxiated like a bird under the bell of a pneumatic machine."

This great thinker occasionally used happy illustrations, drawn, like
the present one, from physical and natural science. From the brightness
with which the girl concurred with the suggestion he concluded that he
had as usual found the key to the matter.

Ventura looked as usual. The terrible scene that had been enacted, the
sacrifice of her sister, which she knew had incurred her righteous
contempt, had not affected her. She went on just the same as before,
just as careful of herself and careless of others as she had ever been.
Nevertheless, whenever she encountered the clear, penetrating eyes of
her sister she turned her own away. From the night of the affair she
avoided being alone with her, which was very easy, as Cecilia had no
wish to exchange a word with the treacherous girl.

Gonzalo feeling quite sure of his wife, reveled in his sense of
security, and a recrudescence of affection arose between the couple.

Ventura had made him promise he would never again sleep away from home,
and to this he agreed.

Thinking of his sister-in-law's sin, he frequently said to himself:

"The Lord preserve me from still waters, and I will take care of the
running ones."

And henceforth he not only pardoned the lightness and frivolity of his
wife's vain disposition, which had once so much disgusted him, but came
to regard these defects as a guarantee of her fidelity.

"There is nobody without some faults," he would say to himself, "and I
would prefer her to have those that are aboveboard."

Five or six days after the event related, "The Youth of Sarrio"
published a paragraph, insinuating the same idea as that which had led
Gonzalo to make the memorable nocturnal visit to Tejada. The young man
read it without emotion and with a smile on his lips, laughing to
himself at the mistake under which his enemies were laboring.
Nevertheless, as it was, after all, an insult to have such things
written, he determined to chastise its insolent authors, albeit in a
matter-of-fact fashion. Therefore at nightfall he abruptly entered the
office of "The Youth," when not more than three of the staff were
present, one of whom was the traitor Sinforoso Suarez. Without saying a
word Gonzalo fell upon them tooth and nail, with so much force and rage
that they utterly succumbed to the attack. When one of them did rise
from the ground a tremendous blow knocked him down again; and not only
were they leveled, but the tables and cupboards were also overthrown,
making more noise than an earthquake. When tired of administering this
corporal punishment, he quietly left the place, laughing. A few people
responded to the cries for help, but he said to them:

"It is nothing, señores; but the managers of 'The Youth' have had a
thrashing up there; and, I say, look here! go up and tell those fellows
that if they continue with these libels I shall be obliged to send them
to prison."

When the facts of the case were known the event caused some commotion.
The members of the Cabin were in a frenzy, but Gonzalo inspired such
deep respect, not so much from his position of mayor, but from the
terror of his fist, that they at last resigned themselves to overlooking
the drubbing administered to their confederates.

The Carnival went by without any great festivity, for Sarrio was no
longer the scene of the processions and cavalcades which had once been
the talk of the province while converting the town into a miniature
Venice. At one time all the inhabitants took part in the great burst of
gaiety. The rich not only decked themselves befittingly for the
occasion, but they started subscriptions for the importation of gorgeous
costumes from Madrid. The cavalcades were incessant and indefatigable in
directing showers of almonds, caramels, and aniseed at the windows. The
balls at the Lyceum, if not as brilliant, were as entertaining and as
bright as those in the most opulent palaces of the court. Oh, the
Carnival of Sarrio! Who in the south of the province, where these events
took place, will cease to have grateful, and tender recollections of it?

But all had changed with the Guelph and Ghibelline-like political strife
between the members of the Club and the Cabin. Every one remained in
seclusion at home, and the streets were only favored with the sight of
some bold mummer, who afforded delight to the crowd of boys in his wake.

The Titanic efforts of Don Mateo were powerless to awake any enthusiasm
about balls at the Lyceum. It was in vain that he conferred with the
marriageable girls of the place to get promises to help him, which
promises were easily gained, but when it came to interviewing papa, he
knitted his brows and gravely said:

"Well, we will see, Don Mateo; we will see." And this "we will see"
generally signified a prudent abstention. For there might be there Mr.
This or Mr. That, with whom the good papa was not on terms of
acquaintance.

The previous year Don Mateo had tried to revive the old Piñate ball of
glorious renown, known to all good Sarrio folks as the chief feature of
the first Sunday in Lent, but the mayor, who was then Maza, under cover
of religion and trying to curry favor with the clergy of the town, would
not give permission. This year the indefatigable old man returned to the
task with increased ardor. Gonzalo made no objection to granting his
permission. Then he stimulated the interest of the place to such an
extent, by laying stress upon the extraordinary wonders and surprises of
the famous globe, ordered from Bordeaux, that he ended by exciting a
universal wish to be present that evening at the Lyceum.

So for the first time in Sarrio for several years the salon of the
society promised a full attendance. During the days preceding the Sunday
the talk and preparations of the young people drowned the disagreeable
sounds of politics. It was like a moment's respite for the weary town.
Directly Venturita heard that a ball was really in preparation, she
ordered from her dressmaker a most magnificent dress to represent Queen
Elizabeth of England, and one for Cecilia as a lady of the time of Louis
XV. The latter at first declined to go to the ball, but Gonzalo made
such a point of it, doubtless to rouse her a little from the melancholy
to which she had lately fallen a prey, that she at last gave in, and
several afternoons were employed in going to Sarrio, trying on the
dresses and giving instructions to the dressmaker.

The longed-for Sunday at length arrived, and Gonzalo, who was very busy
all the morning, lunched in Sarrio and returned about dusk to Tejada to
dine with his family, and to escort his wife and sister-in-law to the
ball.

When he arrived the ladies were dressing themselves in their different
rooms, and a little after the usual hour they both appeared in the
corridor in their elegant attire.

Cecilia was bright and loquacious, as those of a serious temperament are
in moments of excitement; and she seemed to have shaken off the black
thoughts that had lately cast such a gloom over her face.

Before taking his seat at table Gonzalo tried some playful jokes with
her, as well as with his wife, and during the dinner he continued to
laugh at their expense in his own genial, hearty way.

"Will not your majesty take a little sausage?" he said, addressing his
wife. And then, delighted with his remark, he gave vent to a long, loud
roar of laughter, like those given by barbarous kings at their
festivities, while his enormous frame heaved convulsively.

His healthy, manly spirits were infectious, and no one could help
laughing when he started.

Ventura was very amiable that evening, and she tapped her husband on the
shoulder and begged him to be quiet, as she could not eat in peace.

When dinner was over and they were taking coffee, either through
laughing too much or from some other cause, the young wife complained of
indisposition; her dinner had disagreed with her. She expressed a wish
to withdraw, retired to her room, and shortly returned, saying that she
was not well, and that her head was aching. Tea was made for her, and
she lay on the sofa for some time, but the pain and distemper remained.

"Look here! you go to the ball, and I will go to bed," she said, raising
her head.

Cecilia, suddenly filled with a suspicion, replied: "No; I will stay,
too."

"How silly," exclaimed the invalid, "to deprive yourself of the only
entertainment Sarrio has given for some time on such a frivolous
pretext!"

"Yes," replied Cecilia with the same gravity; "I shall remain."

"But you know this indisposition hardly causes me any suffering. I am
rather bilious; four or five hours' sleep will quite restore me."

"Well, I shall remain."

"Then I shall be obliged to go, ill or not ill," she said impatiently,
as she rose from the sofa.

"Ventura is right, bag of bones," said Gonzalo, taking his sister-in-law
by the shoulders, and shaking her affectionately. "It is nothing. I have
had it a hundred times. Why should you give up going to the ball? Here,
here! get your mantilla. Ramon has already put the horses in; it is more
than half-past nine," he added, pushing her toward the door. Cecilia
could not resist him, but before leaving the room she cast a piercing
glance at her sister, who avoided meeting it by resuming her seat. Ramon
was, in truth, waiting for them with the family coach. The largest
carriage was used that evening, as Don Rosendo and Pablito, who were
dining in town, were to return with them in the small hours of the
morning. During the drive Gonzalo was still chatty and merry, trying to
amuse his sister-in-law, who had resumed her taciturn manner. The young
man thought that she was still tormented by the recollection of the
fatal scene already narrated, and so made every effort to distract her.

Arrived at the Lyceum, Gonzalo and Cecilia went in, arm in arm, and they
crossed a large anteroom, where a crowd of young men made way for them,
and greeted them with the familiarity usual in little towns. There were
several ladies in the salon, all in fancy dress, although the majority
of them, like Cecilia, wore no masks. This was an innovation in Sarrio.

For the last five years the balls at the Lyceum had been dreary affairs.
But, thanks to the perseverance of Mateo, the flame of pleasure burst
that night into a brightly burning bonfire. The youth of the town
entered the empty salon like an overflowing torrent, making the place
resound with the bright tones of their talk and laughter.

"Alvara, do you know me? do you know me? Why don't you marry? For you
are on the road to old age."

"Periquito, do you like me? Why do you wear a mask? You don't want one.
You are not taken with faces, and there you are right. Look here and
look there. Eh? Ta-ta, ta-ta, Periquito."

"Hollo, Delaunay! Hollo, monsieur! How goes the aerial tramway? What
will you have next? What a long head you have! It is a pity you are so
unfortunate. They say you are not a practical man, but you knew how to
settle the 'Rat's' daughter. Good-by. Good-by."

"And here's Sinforoso. When are they going to give you Cipriana's hand?
They treat you very badly. Why don't you threaten to go back to the
Club?"

It was a party of ladies in black dominoes who cut these jokes, which
were at times too strong. The majority of them were old, for the younger
ones liked to show their faces and the turn of their figures in some
historical costume. There were costumes of Venetian and Roman ladies,
costumes of the lower empire, costumes of the time of Louis XV, of the
Directory, of Philip II, and others, down to the most recent period.
There were also gitanas, necromancers, slaves, and many other fanciful
and romantic costumes not admitting classification. There was one
representing a starry night, another a tulip, and another a carrier
pigeon with a letter at her neck.

The men, as a rule, were not in costume. They wore the long, full frock
coat which only came out on such occasions. Nevertheless, some wore a
domino, which permitted them to talk to the girls they admired without
fear of being interrupted by the mama.

A party of young fellows belonging to the Cabin conceived the happy idea
of dressing up Don Jaime Morin as a bib-and-tucker young lady. When
dressed up like this they told him that he would be better disguised
with paint than with a mask, and he concurred with the suggestion. A
young fellow then took up a box of paints and a brush, and pretending to
dip it into several colors, he passed the brush several times over his
face, but it had only been dipped in water.

Morin asked to see himself in a looking-glass, but the mischievous
youths took good care not to give it to him. They all cried out: "But
how capital you are, Don Jaime! How grotesquely you are painted! Your
own mother would not know you!" Upon the strength of these words the
good Morin allowed himself to be carried off to the Lyceum, where his
young friends advised him to joke certain young ladies, to which he
replied that his jokes would prove a shock to their nerves. And in
effect, no sooner was he in the salon than he cried out to a young lady,
in a falsetto voice:

"Hollo, Rosarita! what have you done with Anselmo? We know that you
throw him a letter out of the window every night at ten o'clock."

"But, Don Jaime!" exclaimed the girl, looking at him in surprise, "how
did you find that get up?"

"The devil! She knew me," said the good Morin, withdrawing. He then
turned to another of the fair sex, with the same result. "It is
strange," he said at last, "they all know me at once. It must be the
voice, because although I am painted with a vengeance--"

He was full of these reflections when a bony hand seized him from
behind.

"Great ass! booby! idiot! Who got you up like that?"

It was his beloved spouse, the ingenious, severe, Doña Brigida.

"Get along, stupid! You're always the laughing-stock of every place!"
and she pushed the poor fellow out of the salon. The good lady, who was
dressed in a domino and mask, went with him as far as the anteroom,
where she left him, and returned to the ballroom to carry out her own
devices, as we shall see.

Surrounded by a group of dominoes stood the kind Don Feliciano Gomez,
whose shining, bald, pyramidical head overtopped the circle of ladies
around him as they cracked their insufferable jokes, which sometimes
bordered on insults.

"Feliciano, poor fellow! So your sisters let you come to the ball! At
what time will they send for you? They say that Doña Petra beats you
when you are late; is that a fact? Poor Feliciano! how strict your
sisters are! Well, as they did not let you marry, they ought to give you
a little more liberty."

The good merchant, without taking offense, gave kind, smiling replies to
the harpies, who at last grew tired of his patience, and left him in
peace.




CHAPTER XXXI

THE ENLIGHTENMENT OF GONZALO


The charming Pablito, correctly attired in a frock coat, with a white
buttonhole bouquet, was meanwhile courting a beautiful Jewish girl,
sister of an artillery officer, who had just arrived. The poor girl was
overjoyed at seeing at her feet the richest and most eligible young man
in the town. What smiles! what meaning looks! The girls of the place
cast derisive glances at her, as much as to say: "Enjoy yourself a
little, unhappy one; you will soon be disillusioned."

Pablito, as he bent over her in a submissive way, whispered in her ear
such ardent and ingenious phrases as:

"As I was coming from Tejada yesterday, I saw you with your father, as
pretty as ever."

"What nonsense! I saw you, too. You were driving an open carriage. You
drive very well."

"That is flattery, Carmencita. To drive nowadays is nothing. Anybody can
do it. If you had only seen those horses when I bought them! One was a
caution. It takes about a year to let them have their head, driving
them every day. Don Agapito's coachman nearly spoiled them altogether,
especially the handsome one, don't you know, the left-hand one, a little
darker than the other; he was quite spoiled. If he had fallen into other
hands he would not have been worth more than 2,000 reales now. But now
he is better than the other. It is a question of patience, don't you
see?"

The beautiful Jewess remonstrated. "Come, don't make light of what we
all know you do well."

"Patience and a little practise," repeated Pablito, on a bed of roses.
Then he entered full swing on what he considered constituted a good
driver: a firm, gentle hand, a quick eye, prompt castigation without
loss of temper at any misdemeanor, and a perfect knowledge of horses,
for without a careful, thoughtful study of the temperaments of the
animals it is impossible to drive systematically.

Carmencita listened, quite entranced. Cecilia had not been long in the
ballroom before she was joined by Paco Flores, the engineer, who had
asked her in marriage through the mouth of Gonzalo. From the time the
girl refused him the young man, who, as we have seen, at first thought
only of winning a modest, capable wife with money, fell more in love
with her, and became unremitting in his attentions. Self-love always
plays a great part in love, and it is not often easy, even for the
individual himself, to distinguish the one feeling from the other.

When it was seen in Sarrio how persistent the engineer was in courting
Belinchon's eldest daughter, it was thought that he was only anxious for
her dowry; but this was a mistake, for Flores was really in love. If
Cecilia had become suddenly poor he would have made her his wife all the
same, for her behavior only increased his admiration of her. She always
received his attentions and politeness with kindness and gratitude.
There was no fear that she would withdraw from the window when he passed
by, nor snub him if she met him at any friend's house, nor commit any of
those little rudenesses that constitute the delight of the majority of
girls.

She treated him like a good friend, and accorded him the kindness due to
a person one esteems; but as soon as the engineer wanted to go further,
if he asked for a little love, a ray of hope, he was met the next day
with the same firm, gentle, persistent refusal. And the worst of it was,
Cecilia had no pleasure in refusing, but pain, as it hurt her to
disappoint a friend. This feeling was an additional blow to the suitor's
self-love.

After dancing a waltz they sat down to rest in a corner of the salon.
Flores had taken her fan and was fanning her respectfully.

"I should like to spend my life like this," he said in a sincere tone.

"Oh, you would soon get tired of it," returned Cecilia, smiling.

"Will you try me?"

The girl was silent.

"You are not, Cecilia, one of those women of whom one easily tires. You
have treasures in your heart and mind that would always keep the man who
loves you at your feet. You have had my heart for more than two years,
and instead of wearying I feel myself more and more attached to you. I
adore you more and more desperately, to the point of being the
laughing-stock of the place."

"That is nonsense," she replied, albeit touched by the fire and feeling
that Flores had given to his words. "It is not the same thing seeing a
woman a little while now and again, and speaking to her of this and
that, as having her continually with you."

"What should I like better, Cecilia, than to have you always with me!"
returned the engineer in a low, trembling voice, playing with the fan,
with his eyes on the ground. "To consecrate my life to your service, and
to adore you on my knees. I know that you would make any man happy, but
no one as much as I, for I know the great qualities of your soul, and I
divine secret feelings in your heart quite unknown to others. It is
terrible that you will not give me the remotest hope that some day,
distant as it may be, my love will conquer you, and you will accept me
as a slave."

"I accept you as a friend, as a great friend," said the girl gravely.

"Friend, bah! This friendship, Cecilia, is a stone wall between you and
me. I understand that I do not deserve to win your love--that there are
a hundred young men in the town who could ask it with a better right;
but what is so strange, and what encourages and discourages me at the
same time, is that until now you have chosen nobody. Your heart remains
empty and indifferent--that is to say, unless you have some hidden
love."

Cecilia shivered slightly and raised her eyes a little to the place
where the voice of Gonzalo was audible. Then she replied with more
severity than usual:

"Cease studying my heart, Flores. In the first place, because it is most
probably as commonplace as that of the majority of women, and in the
second place, because, if there were something hidden in it, it would
not be easy for you to discover it."

"Don't be offended, Cecilia. This study is only a proof of my interest
in you."

"I am not offended," replied the girl, trying to smile. "I am going to
speak to Rosario. Will you escort me to her?"

In the anteroom, only separated from the ballroom by a few pillars, the
grave fathers were chatting and casting pleased looks to where their
daughters were disporting themselves. Sometimes a masked lady detached
herself from the dancing and came to rally them, and sometimes, being a
contemporary, would make them laugh till they coughed, and then brought
out some of their old stories.

Don Rosendo was chatting in a corner with Don Melchor de las Cuevas. He
was laying before him one of his grand and magnificent projects of which
the port was now the object. It is impossible to imagine how much more
versed in knowledge Belinchon had become in the last few years, and, as
with all great men, it was knowledge more intuitive than studied. At
first, when he wrote for "The Light" on any subject of which he was
ignorant, he was reticent, vacillating, and timid, but as he grew
conversant with the topics of the day, and had at his command a quantity
of hackneyed phrases, and, above all, when he possessed an encyclopedic
dictionary in fifteen volumes, which did not cost him less than 2,000
reales, he tackled any point with tooth and nail. There was not a
subject, or scientific, social, economic, and political problem, upon
which Don Rosendo did not undertake to throw some light. If it was a
question of the plague which was decimating the cattle, Don Rosendo
sought in his dictionary for the words cattle, horse, bull, sheep,
forage, live stock, etc., and as soon as he had read what was said on
the subject he took up his pen, and his journalistic genius was brought
to bear on the production of one or several articles pregnant with
philosophy and erudition.

At the time the question of the port came up, he lost no time in looking
in the dictionary for the words port, dockyard, tides, dredges, winds,
etc. Seven consecutive articles were written and published to show the
necessity of making a dockyard for Sarrio at a spot called Foril. He
posed as a consummate seaman, used to navigating the seas and grown gray
in the study of hydraulic problems. However, the Señor de las Cuevas,
although less eloquent in such a vocabulary of maritime terms, some of
which he did not even know, writhed at the wordy explanation given him
by Don Rosendo, and ended by clapping him on the shoulder, and saying:

"You can disabuse your mind, Belinchon, about your dockyard. When the
wind is in the northeast no sardines come in."

The one who enjoyed the entertainment most was an old man, the good Don
Mateo, to whom it was entirely due. To him the ball represented one of
the great triumphs of his life. It had cost him more trouble than enough
to assemble together the cantankerous townsfolk. He never stopped all
the evening, going, or rather dragging himself, from place to place,
giving orders to the servants, the wardens, and the orchestra.

"Gervasio, now for the plates of sweetmeats! Take one down each side,
you fellows! What do you want, Señor Anselmo? Do the boys want a polka
instead of a waltz? Then let them play a polka. Tell the young men that
there are ladies in the dressing-room waiting for partners. Marcelino!
where has Marcelino got to? Go down to the porch, for some vagabond has
thrown a stone at the lamp and broken it. But, Don Manuel, it is not
more than two o'clock! You won't take away the girls yet, and the
_piñata_ [Jack Horner basket] not yet broken."

The good gentleman was rejuvenated that evening. He shared the pleasure
of the young people as mystics rejoice in a general communion. His dark
eyes occasionally looked over his spectacles at the wooden globe hanging
in the middle of the room, and he gave a chuckle of delight. The
beautiful work of art from Bordeaux was painted with blue and white
stripes, and there hung from beneath it a quantity of ribbons of various
colors, all of which, with one exception, were held by young ladies
ready to pull them, and the one who had the ribbon that opened the
_piñata_ won the globe, which was doubtless filled with sweets, and,
according to report, with very pretty knickknacks. Gonzalo, in the
middle of the party, seemed also in good spirits, being sometimes with
one lady, sometimes with another. He had danced a polka with his
sister-in-law, and a polka and a waltz with two friends of his wife. His
tall, colossal form rose like a tower above the heads of all.

"How cheerful you are, señor mayor!" said a lady of the lower middle
class.

"One has to profit by Ventura's absence," returned the young man with a
laugh. "Where is your husband, Magdalena?"

"Oh, somewhere about."

"Come, dance this polka with me, and let us make hay while the sun
shines."

"I can't. I am engaged to Peña for it."

While he was joking with those about him, a woman enveloped in a black
domino, with a mask of the same hue, never lost sight of him for a
moment, sometimes standing at one spot, sometimes at another, but always
at a short distance from him, while her two shining, fiery eyes were
visible through the holes of her mask. It was Doña Brigida, the
ingenious wife of the spendthrift Morin, who was watching for the right
moment, like the baritone in "Un Ballo in Maschera," to strike the blow.
The victim in that case was a prince, in this it was only a mayor. The
reasons of the eminent lady for meditating this crime would not appear
so weighty as those of the baritone in the eyes of a man, but they
certainly would to any woman.

"The Light of Sarrio," in its anxiety to wound all members of the Cabin,
with their relations and their friends, had for the last three or four
months taken up Morin's wife as a theme. Thus all her domestic secrets
were shown up: her married life, the dependence and degradation of Morin
were caricatured, while all the anecdotes, more or less funny, that were
the current talk of the town, appeared in print, with the addition of
several others, discovered or invented by the malignant editors.

And as if this were not enough, there was not a number of the paper in
question which did not make mention in some way or other of Doña
Brigida's wig, which fact thus became public property in Sarrio. The
anger, the rage, the hate, and the desire for revenge which all this
aroused in the lady it is impossible to imagine. Suffice it to say that
when she met one of the managers of "The Light" in the street she turned
livid, and it was only by a great effort that she restrained herself
from springing at his throat like a mad cat. Hitherto she had had no
opportunity of satisfying this thirst for revenge with which she was
consumed. But now, with Gonzalo before her eyes, she was filled with
delight, she trembled with eagerness, like a tiger in sight of his prey.
Taking advantage of a moment during which nobody was speaking to him,
she came closer behind him, and swiftly placing herself in front of him,
she hissed, more than said:

"Gonzalo, why are you so stupid? You are the laughing-stock of
everybody. There is not a person in the room who does not know that your
wife is this moment with the Duke of Tornos."

The young man was stunned, as if he had received a blow on the forehead;
he turned deadly pale, and then made as though he would tear off her
mask; but that was impossible, for Doña Brigida had slipped away like an
eel among the crowd, and as there were many ladies in the same costume,
it was impossible to know which was the one he sought. Then Gonzalo
quickly left the room, the words he had heard ringing in his head like
hammer strokes. He feared he must fall. In the anteroom he replied with
a stupid smile to the remarks made to him; and his uncle, Don Melchor,
seeing him so pale, came up to him, and said:

"What is the matter, Gonzalo? Are you ill?"

"Yes; I am going to get a cup of tea."

"I'll go with you."

"No, no; I shall be back directly." And he ran off, leaving his uncle
standing at the door.

He descended the staircase, and found himself in the street without
knowing what he was doing. The fresh night air cooled his head and
revived his memory. He suddenly determined to go to Tejada. He looked
about for the carriage, but not seeing it, he thought Ramon had not left
home yet. He looked at his watch; it was only half-past two. He took a
few quick steps toward his father-in-law's house, when he recollected he
had no hat or overcoat on. Returning to the Lyceum, he told the first
servant he met in the hall to bring him down his hat and coat.

Arrived at the house, he found Ramon had already put the horse to the
carriage.

"Ramon, drive me as fast as possible to Tejada at once."

The coachman looked at him in surprise.

"Is madame worse?"

"I think so," he replied, getting into the carriage. "But stop at the
corner by the mill, you understand?"

"You are afraid of disturbing madame, eh?" queried the coachman with
great astuteness. Gonzalo did not reply.

The horses went off at a trot, making the carriage jolt along the stony,
uneven road of the town. Gonzalo did not notice how the movement shook
every bone in his body, nor the change to the highroad on leaving the
town. All his attention was concentrated on one point. Was it true, or
was it not?

Strangely enough, without himself knowing why, the conviction that his
wife had deceived him entered his soul and took possession of it. When
he went to Tejada on foot, about two months before, he had not wished to
harbor this conviction; however much he tried to convince himself that
the insinuation of the paper was true, his head and his heart declined
to admit the idea. Now it was quite different; he tried to think and to
persuade himself that the accusation of the masked lady was only a vile
exhibition of the envy and jealousy of some hidden enemy, and yet he
could not believe it.

When the carriage stopped he had no idea of the time he had been
driving; it might just as well have been a day as a minute. He awoke
from his dream, and jumped out of the carriage.

"Now go back for the family," he said to Ramon; "and don't say you have
brought me; there is no need to trouble them."

He then turned slowly toward the gate of the park some two hundred feet
off, while the carriage went down an opposite road. Arrived at the gate,
he pushed it with a trembling hand; it was open, like the previous time.
He felt a chill at his heart, which obliged him to stop. He finally
entered cautiously, and looked up to see if the key were inside; but it
was not there. The night was neither clear nor dark; the sky was
overcast, and a fine rain was falling which penetrated to the skin. It
made no sound as it fell upon the trees and bushes of the park, but when
disturbed by a gust of wind a quantity of drops came down in a regular
gust, which made a quick, passing, ringing sound on the ground.

Gonzalo suddenly recollected that he had no weapon with him; but then he
shrugged his shoulders in scorn born of the absolute confidence that in
the case of necessity he would not be found wanting. He looked about on
all sides to see if he could see the duke's horse, but instead of seeing
it he caught sight of the shadow of a man disappearing among the trees;
so he ran after him, but he quickly vanished.

He thought it was Pachin, the man-servant, and he then suspected that he
was the traitor who had opened the gate to the duke. Ever since the
night when he had discovered his sister-in-law with the grandee, his
incessant efforts to find out who had helped the duke into the house had
been fruitless. He could not have suspected anybody less than such an
old servant as Pachin. Then, as he thought that the man might possibly
go and warn the traitors, he continued his course toward the house as
quickly as possible.

He once more climbed to his father-in-law's room, but this time only as
far as the window. Swiftly on tiptoe he automatically turned to the
Persian chamber, as if, having met the duke there once, he must
necessarily be there again. Great, therefore, was his surprise to find
it dark and deserted. He stood a moment riveted to the spot, but
suddenly, struck by an idea, he ran to the room where Ventura slept. The
door was locked from the inside. He called out quickly:

"Ventura! Ventura!"

"Who is there?" cried his wife from within in a frightened, strange
voice.

"It is I. Open, open directly."

"I am in bed."

"No matter, open at once."

"Let me dress."

"No; open directly, or I'll break the door."

"I am coming! I am coming!"

The young man waited a minute, but instead of the door he thought he
heard the window of the room being opened.

"Open, Ventura!" he cried in a rage. And receiving no answer, he gave
such a blow at the door with his powerful cyclopean leg that it burst
the lock with a loud noise. The room was in darkness.

"Ventura! Ventura!" he cried.

No answer. He struck a match with a trembling hand, and gave a look
round the room. His wife, pale and affrighted, was cowering in a corner
in her night-dress. Gonzalo turned his eyes from her and looked all
round in search of some one, until he noticed the window half open.
Throwing it up and leaning out, he saw something white running under the
trees--it was the figure of a man in his shirt-sleeves.

Gonzalo did not stop to climb down from the window; he took a flying
leap into the garden, and darted after the fugitive like an arrow. But
the man had already reached the iron gate, opened it, and disappeared.
Gonzalo was not far behind him, but an instant later he saw him on
horseback, under the shadow of the trees, dash down the road in the
direction of Nieva.

Inspired, nevertheless, with an insane hope of catching him, Gonzalo
rushed back to the stables, took out his beautiful saddle-horse, and
putting on a bridle, he jumped on his bare back, and also took the road
to Nieva with all speed possible. He had neither spurs nor whip, but the
brave animal obeyed his voice, or rather his roars, and went at a
furious pace. The eyes of the horse saw the road, but the rider was only
conscious of a black abyss, which seemed about to swallow him up, and
the old elms that lined the road seemed to fly by like a ghastly
procession of phantoms.

On, on, on.

The noble brute flew on as if impelled by a goad for about half an hour.

"It is impossible," said Gonzalo to himself, "that his horse is better
than mine. He had at least a start of two gunshots of me!" But just as
he was thinking this, and was hesitating about reining in the horse, he
passed by one that stood saddled, but riderless, by the side of the
road. He made his own steed halt with some difficulty, and turning back
to see what it was, he recognized the duke's English mare.

"Oh," he roared, "now I've got you!" For he thought his enemy must have
had a fall. He dismounted and searched the ground, but no rider did he
find. Then he said to himself: "Perhaps hearing the gallop of my horse,
and fearing that it would overtake him, he has hidden himself somewhere
about here."

He then sprang into the neighboring field, and made as careful a search
as he could by the light of matches: he looked behind the hedges, he
searched the brambles, then he went some way along the bank of a stream
on his left, but his box of matches came to an end before he could
discover his enemy, so he retraced his steps, mad with rage.

If the Duke of Tornos were hidden somewhere about there, he must have
had an anxious time of it.




CHAPTER XXXII

RETRIBUTION


After seeing her husband disappear through the window, Ventura dressed
herself quickly and left the room to find a servant. Just at this moment
Pachin arrived with a disconcerted face, carrying a light.

"The señorito is rushing after the duke across the garden," he said in a
hardly audible voice.

"Will he catch him?" asked the unfaithful wife, very pale, although
somewhat recovered from her fright.

"I don't think so; the duke has his horse tied to the Antony vine. He
had the start, and, once mounted, it will be impossible to overtake
him."

"Where shall I hide myself? If he comes back he will kill me."

"It will be best to leave the house. Come with me."

The girl then followed the servant along the passages, down the back
staircase and out by the kitchen door. Pachin wished to take her to the
parish priest's house, which was near to the estate. When they were
entering the garden they saw Gonzalo running toward the house, and they
only just had time to hide behind the Washingtonia close to the
dining-room. From there they saw him go into the stable, bring out a
horse and go off full gallop, and Ventura thought she would die of
fright.

"No, no; I don't want to go to the priest's house. He will return soon,
and the priest could not defend me from him--he is a poor old man--I
want to go to Sarrio."

"But, señorita, to Sarrio at this hour, and raining?"

"Is there no carriage?"

"There is the landau, but there are no horses. Wait a bit. I will alter
the shafts, and we will harness Señorita, Pablo's mare--I don't answer
for her going in it."

"Capital! capital!"

Pachin carried out his idea as quickly as possible. Ventura got into the
carriage, and off they went.

Although at first the mare rebelled a little, once on the highroad the
thought of the stable at Sarrio, her usual abode, made her go very well.

The girl told the servant to drive her to Don Rudesindo's house, as she
was on rather intimate terms with his wife. There she remained until two
or three days after the event, when her father took her to Madrid, and
from thence to Ocaña, where she was shut up in a convent by the joint
arrangement of Gonzalo and Rosendo. The great patrician, as we know, was
not much in favor of positive religions, but "as long as society
provided no other coercive measures for certain moral transgressions, he
was perforce led to look for them from old social institutions,
deficient and vitiated as they might be."

We must now return to Gonzalo. He passed the whole day locked in his
room in a state of agitation approaching madness. The only person who
ventured to enter his room was Don Rosendo, who talked to him in a kind
and dignified style, adorned with periphrases and florid periods
befitting his character as a writer. He took a seat by his side and
cursed his daughter, "whose inexpressible conduct, defying [Don Rosendo
had lately taken a great fancy to this verb] at once morality, law, and
social practise, had placed her beyond the pale of all legal and family
protection."

It was he who suggested shutting her up for a time in a convent. Poor
Gonzalo, overwhelmed and distraught, never answered a word, but listened
to him while walking backward and forward across the room with his hands
in his pockets and his eyes wet and gloomy. Once only he raised his head
to say with firmness:

"Take her where you like--but don't let her see my children. I do not
want her lips to touch them."

At dusk a servant came to tell Gonzalo that two gentlemen had arrived in
a trap, who wished to see him on urgent business. Guessing immediately
the import of the matter he said at once: "Show them in."

Two gentlemen from Nieva then entered. One was the Marquis of
Soldevilla, a middle-aged man, quite bald, with a complexion marked with
erysipelas, and black teeth. He talked in a loud tone to seem at his
ease. The other, named Golarzo, was old, gray, and a man of few words or
friends. They came on behalf of the duke to arrange a serious matter
that had happened the previous night--about an affair of honor. The duke
did not wish to rob the Señor de las Cuevas of the reparation due to
him. To run away on such an occasion was not according to his habits nor
his character, neither was it befitting his social status. But at the
same time, in the interest of Gonzalo and himself, he expected that all
would be executed with as much privacy as possible.

Without wincing, and affecting a calmness he was far from feeling,
Gonzalo put no check to the loquacity of the marquis, which bordered on
impertinence.

"All right," he said, when he had finished. "I accept the challenge, and
I am ready to fulfil it when it suits you. But it is rather odd," he
added with a nervous laugh, which badly cloaked the anger which
consumed him. "It is rather odd for the señor duke to send the
challenge, seeing that I am the injured party. This course seems to me
more prompted by fear than by gentlemanliness."

"Señor de las Cuevas," broke in the ex-colonel with acerbity, "we can
not permit these derogatory remarks to be made in our presence."

Gonzalo looked at him in an absent way as if he had not heard him, and
then continued:

"In fact I could, and even I ought to reject his challenge, because it
is not customary for decent men to fight scoundrels, even if they bear
the title of king."

"Señor de las Cuevas," exclaimed Golarza, rising in anger from his seat,
"this is insufferable, and I will not permit you to speak like this."

"The Duke of Tornos is a scoundrel, and you know he is," he returned,
looking him straight in the eyes in a provocative way.

The fact was, it would have required some courage to withstand Gonzalo
at that moment. Golarza turned white and, rising, said:

"This is your house, therefore I retire."

"Do you want me to say it to you outside?" he exclaimed impetuously as
he also rose from his seat.

"Señores," cried the marquis in his cracked voice, "calm yourselves.
Golarza, you have no right to get angry. The sort of injury that our
patron has done the gentleman (and I am sorry to have to refer to it)
excuses his want of appreciation of his character. I think from the
moment he accepts the duel he has sufficiently atoned for the tone of
his remarks, the outcome of the natural anger to which he is a prey."

Gonzalo felt inclined to hurl the table beside him at the fulsome
peacemaker; but he stood motionless and silent because of his ardent
desire to come face to face with the duke.

The ex-colonel resumed his seat at the entreaty of his companion, and
either from spite, or from fear of the young man's irascible state, he
did not utter another word. Gonzalo said that he would depute two
friends, who would arrange with them the details for their meeting at
Nieva in the morning. In the meanwhile they would be returning to the
town, unless they would do him the honor of being his guests that night.

The friends of the duke thanked him and proceeded to withdraw. When they
were standing ready to go, Gonzalo, addressing himself to the marquis,
said:

"I request that your conferences with regard to this duel, and the duel
itself, may take place in Nieva--because--" he added in a tone half
sarcastic, half tremulous, "strange as it may appear to you, in this
house there are people who love me."

The seconds promised to concede to this wish and they then returned to
Nieva.

After Cecilia saw them depart she haunted her brother-in-law's door
without daring to go in. But coming out in search of Pablito the young
man met her in the half-dark passage; when the girl, seizing him by the
hand, fixed an imploring look upon his face. She said:

"Do not fight, Gonzalo."

Mustering up the strength to dissimulate, he exclaimed, scornfully:

"I fight with this scoundrel! Never! I will kill him when I meet him."

She believed his words, but she turned to say in a broken voice:

"Don't do it, for the sake of your innocent children."

"For my children and for you," he returned, caressing her cheek
affectionately with his hand.

And overcome by emotion he hastily withdrew.

On meeting Pablo he said in a low tone:

"I can speak openly with you; you are a man, and you know that there are
things in life that are inevitable. The seconds of the duke have just
gone, and I have just deceived Cecilia by promising not to fight. But,
as you understand, that is impossible."

"Why?--No, you ought not to fight--I am the one--I ought to kill this
wretched fellow," impetuously exclaimed the handsome youth.

"Thanks, Pablo, thanks," returned Gonzalo gravely, in an unsteady
voice, and clasping his hand effusively, "but that can't be. Think a
little over the affair, and you will see that your affection and kind
wishes lead you astray."

It cost Gonzalo some trouble to convince Pablo that he was the one who
should fight the duke first, and his not very fertile brain was much
exercised in his search for reasonable and logical arguments in support
of this decision.

Pablo only gave in after a long discussion and with the understanding
that if Gonzalo were wounded in the duel he should challenge the duke.

There was something in the loyalty and affection shown him by all the
family, and in the open and decided way in which they ranked themselves
on his side and repudiated the erring daughter and sister, which touched
while it overwhelmed him.

This magnanimous conduct obliged him to be generous and not mention the
name of the faithless girl in conversation, as he could not do so in
measured language.

Pablito was not so reticent, but he saw that it was better not to
continue the subject.

"Look here, go early to-morrow to Sarrio and take the letters I will
give you to Alvaro Peña and Don Rudesindo. Let them proceed at once to
Nieva, trying to keep out of sight as they pass by here. Let them
arrange the matter as quickly as possible, and send word to Sarrio about
the day and time. You will get it there, and bring it straight to me.
Then I will manage to leave here without letting your father and Cecilia
know about it."

Having received his directions Pablo went off on horseback to Sarrio at
daybreak to execute them, and Peña and Don Rudesindo at once proceeded
to Nieva.

Gonzalo from his bedroom window saw the carriage, in which they were, go
by.

As may be supposed, the gossip in Sarrio was terrible. Nothing else was
spoken about. The friends of Belinchon looked glum, and there were
several who blamed Don Rosendo for having so spoiled his youngest
daughter and having put up with her airs and graces of a princess.

The enemies of the patrician were in a state of pure delight and added a
thousand particulars to the scandal.

The few impartial people in the place contented themselves with pitying
Gonzalo, and censuring the repugnant proceeding of Morin's malicious
spouse; for every one knew it was she who had put the match to the
train. Many inquisitive people passed in front of Don Rudesindo's house,
and gazed eagerly at the windows, and tried to glean from the servants,
as they came out, what was going on within. It was said that Ventura was
very quiet, and showed little sorrow for her conduct, for she had dined
and joked and laughed with the wife of the cider manufacturer. It was
thought that the eager curiosity shown in this quarter would have
distracted attention from Don Rudesindo's expedition to Nieva with Peña.
But the object of the journey was suspected, and the news ran through
the town like wildfire, that Gonzalo was to have a duel with the duke,
no one knew where.

Don Melchor de las Cuevas lived alone with a man and a woman-servant.
The night of the ball he went home and, calling at the Belinchons, they
told him that Gonzalo had gone to Tejada; so, not feeling well, the old
man retired to bed without any suspicions.

The following day he still felt indisposed, not being accustomed to late
hours, so he remained at home. However, he sent his man to Belinchon's
to ask after his nephew, and there the servant heard all that had
happened. But not daring to tell his master the news, the servant
brought back the message that Gonzalo was all right at Tejada.

That day went by, and on the following, which was Tuesday, the servant
heard that the young man was to have a duel with the duke. Then, either
fearing to incur responsibility, or because he thought his master could
prevent the trouble, he told him the whole story, albeit with some
reservation.

Don Melchor, wounded in his tenderest affections, jumped up from his
armchair and ordered a carriage to be fetched at once to take him to
Tejada, and when it came to the door he got in, telling the driver to go
with all speed to Belinchon's country place. Don Rosendo was the first
person he saw, and he received him with some confusion and shame, as if
he shared in the disgrace weighing upon Gonzalo. Don Melchor was rather
cold to him, not intentionally, but from his desire to see his nephew.
Don Rosendo took him to his room door, and there left him. Then the
Señor de las Cuevas rapped with his knuckles.

"Who's there?" was sharply asked from within.

Whereupon the old man turned the handle, and went in without answering.
Gonzalo, who was standing in the middle of the room, turned as red as
fire on seeing his uncle, who clasped him affectionately to his breast.

Copious tears then flowed down the young man's face. Nobody had seen him
weep during that trying time, but the old man had been a father to him
from his infancy, and he had no shame in revealing to him the most
hidden wounds of his heart.

They remained for some time in each other's arms; and Don Melchor at
last released his nephew and, pushing him toward an armchair, he said:

"Sit down."

So Gonzalo dropped into the seat and hid his eyes with his hand.

"It is a heavy blow," said the sailor in a hoarse voice, after a long
silence--"a treacherous squall has put your bark under water. But you
are a ship of much strength," he added, placing his hands on the young
man's herculean shoulders. "You have solid bulwarks--we will weather the
storm yet."

Gonzalo made no answer.

"Why did you not come home at once?"

"Because it would have been a cruel slight on this poor family in its
deep affliction. They have been so kind to me."

"If that is so, you did well--but you ought to have told me--I don't
forgive you for that."

"But why? The later you heard the bad news the better."

"That's not so! I am like your father, Gonzalo, and I can sympathize
with you--They tell me you are going to have a duel with him--with that
pirate. Is it so?"

"No--no such thing now--" returned the young man with some hesitation.

"Don't deceive me, Gonzalo! This duel can not take place. I have come
determined to prevent it."

"There is nothing going on, uncle. Make yourself easy."

"It is useless for you to deceive me. I won't leave you for a moment.
Here I will remain, I will sleep by your side so that you don't escape
me, and I will keep guard over you from dawn to midday and till eve."

Gonzalo stood aghast, seeing that it was necessary to confess all, and
to face the matter.

"And if it were true, what of it, uncle? Would you dare to prevent your
nephew doing what is exacted by honor?"

"Yes, sir--And don't speak to me of daring!--Yes, sir, I dare," returned
the old man in a rage. "Do you want me to give my consent to your losing
your life through a villain, a rogue, who crept into your house to
villainously betray your honor? Rogues like that are strung up, or shot,
one does not fight them. You are blind, Gonzalo. Stop a moment, man, get
to the bottom of the scandal and you will see that it does not hold
water."

"What would you have me do then? Do you want me to let him go off
quietly to Madrid? Do you want me to see him off and wish him a pleasant
journey, and thank him for the kindness he has done me?"

"No, he has been curse enough; kill him if you like, but don't lose your
own life."

"That is very easy to say, uncle," replied Gonzalo caustically. "Imagine
that I go to Nieva, I seek him out, I shoot him, or I kill him with a
blow--then I am taken off to prison, and however righteous my cause was,
I have to undergo some years' incarceration--Allowing that the majority
of men exonerate the deed, they would not think it a very brave one."

Don Melchor stood some moments confounded, not knowing what to reply,
but he did not give in. Finally he raised his head quickly, his eyes
shining with delight.

"I have found a solution!"

"What?"

"You remain quietly at home. I will go myself to Nieva, meet the duke,
and kill him."

"Oh! uncle, many thanks! But it can not be," returned Gonzalo, unable to
repress a smile.

"What are you laughing at, silly?" exclaimed the good old man, with his
eyes blazing. "You think perhaps your uncle is a useless old hulk, who
can not handle a sword or a pistol? The devil take it! the devil!" he
added, each time with more anger, and gesticulating about the room like
a madman--"I am the same as I was at twenty years of age--I run upstairs
four steps at a time without any fatigue--I drink five bottles of pale
ale without it getting into my head--I can knock a bull down with a
blow, and I can launch a heavy boat. And is all this anything to laugh
at, and snap your fingers at in such a brutal fashion?"

"I am not laughing at that, uncle--I know, I know."

"Let's see, then; give me your hand and feel if I can squeeze it or
not."

Gonzalo gave him his hand, and the old sailor squeezed it with all his
strength, his face red and contorted. Although not much hurt, the young
man feigned most dreadful pain.

"My! my!"

"Eh, well?" exclaimed the uncle with an air of triumph. "Can I or can I
not free the world of a villain?"

"I know you can; you are stronger than I. But that is not the question.
The thing is to see what is to be done; if it would be right for you or
for me. Don't you see, uncle, that the disgrace of being a deceived
husband rests solely upon me, and it would be made much, inconceivably,
worse, if you fought the duel and not I? I know that this disgrace must
be wiped out with blood, but it must be blood shed by my hand."

Don Melchor did not wish to concur in this opinion; he argued, he
scolded, and he grew angry. Nevertheless, it was evident that this
density was assumed. Gonzalo's arguments began to take effect upon his
mind, and filled his soul with bitterness. At last he beat a retreat,
only asking for the duel to be postponed, for him to travel for a time,
and if on his return he still wished to fight he should do so.

The discussion was still going on when Don Rosendo called outside the
door to ask them if they would have luncheon there or come down to the
dining-room.

Gonzalo chose the latter course, as he was anxious to show no coldness
toward his father-in-law and sister-in-law.

The luncheon was melancholy.

In spite of the efforts made by all, Gonzalo included, to seem
unconcerned, a black cloud hung over the party and overshadowed their
faces. After taking coffee, and sitting quiet a little while, Gonzalo
said:

"Uncle, you left your bed to come here. You can not feel well. Shall a
room be got ready for you? I believe you ought to go to bed." Then Don
Melchor, seeing that his nephew wanted to be alone, said:

"No; I am going back to Sarrio. Let them put to."

He then took leave of Belinchon and Cecilia, and Gonzalo walked with him
as far as the park gate. They were both silent and gloomy; and the old
man was extremely pale. Before getting into the carriage, he gave his
nephew a long and affectionate embrace, and in a broken voice he said in
his ear:

"Strike him between air and water, my boy."

When they parted, his face was bathed in tears, and, getting into the
carriage, he hid himself in a corner unable to say good-by.

Gonzalo looked after the vehicle and stood for some time motionless,
holding by an iron bar of the gate.

Pablito returned from the town early in the evening. After dinner, he
found an opportunity to say quickly to his brother-in-law:

"To-morrow at eight at Soldevilla's place. Pistols. Peña and Don
Rudesindo will go by here at six. Be ready."

Gonzalo slept that night better than the previous one. The fierce
satisfaction of the certainty of meeting the duke the following morning
calmed his nerves.

At five in the morning he awoke active and fresh with no recollection of
dreams. He dressed himself and sallied forth, with as little noise as
possible, on tiptoe as dawn was breaking.

"Are you going shooting, sir?" asked a servant whom he met.

"No, I am going to see the miller, to have the canal kept low, as I want
to fish this evening."

He passed on to the road, and went in the direction of Nieva, waiting
for the carriage with his seconds to catch him up, which it did in about
half an hour. Peña and Don Rudesindo were much excited. When the young
man entered the carriage they shook hands with great warmth and
acquainted him with the conditions of the duel--they were to have twenty
paces between them, and to advance and retreat as they pleased. This
affair was by far the most serious one they had taken part in.

Gonzalo listened quietly; and he merely mentioned that he would have
preferred swords, as he would have liked to have been nearer to his
enemy. He did not seem upset, for the fact was, the excitement of
meeting his foe face to face was an agreeable change from the torment of
the preceding days, when the picture of his wife, in her night-dress,
cowering in a corner, never left his mind's eye.

Besides, Gonzalo, like all those of an excessively vigorous temperament,
was born for dangers; he reveled in them as if he were certain that the
life coursing through his veins was inexhaustible. They did not reach
the Soldevilla estate before half-past eight. The duke and his seconds
had been waiting for some time. The former was not visible, being within
the house. The marquis and Golarza escorted Peña and Don Rudesindo
indoors, while Gonzalo took a turn in the garden. The Soldevilla place
consisted of an old house half in ruins, with scanty, very old
furniture, covered with dust; a rather large garden, more cared for than
the house, and behind the garden an old orchard. The place was
surrounded by meadows and lands, also belonging to the marquis.

The seconds discussed in the house whether the pistols brought by Peña,
or those of the duke, should be used, and they decided upon those of the
latter. Then the conditions of the duel were written out with a very
bad pen of the majordomo's, for the marquis only wrote about one letter
a year there. The pistols were loaded, and they sallied forth to seek a
convenient spot for the combat.

"Manuel," said the marquis, seeing a man busy planting onions in one of
the garden beds, "go away."

The servant looked at him in surprise.

"Be off, man," he reiterated with increased severity. "Go somewhere
else."

The servant then left the garden, casting looks of astonishment and
curiosity behind him.

A place was chosen in one of the narrowest paths in the centre of the
garden, and Soldevilla went to fetch the duke.

Dawn broke that day in a clear sky; but very early after sunrise heavy,
dark clouds gathered over that part of the coast, threatening an early
discharge of heavy rain.

The light grew dimmer and dimmer to an extraordinary degree until it
waned to a misty gray.

The duke appeared in a black frock coat and broad-brimmed hat, rather
paler than usual, but affecting a calm disdain, coupled with his usual
courtesy. He had a fragrant cigar in his mouth with which he enveloped
himself in light clouds of smoke as he walked by the side of Soldevilla.

Arriving at the appointed spot he gave a cold ceremonious greeting to
the group of Gonzalo and his seconds, and vouchsafed them no further
glance. After a few minutes' conference Peña put Gonzalo in position and
handed him a loaded pistol. Soldevilla did the same with the duke. They
had both removed their hats. The grandee retained his cigar in his left
hand, and, with an impassibility which savored of the theatrical, he
gave long puffs at it. Great drops of rain, heralding a sharp shower,
began to fall; and Peña finally called out:

"Gentlemen, are you ready? One, two, three!--fire!"

The duke inclined his pistol and aimed. Gonzalo, also aiming, came
forward with a pale face and with his eyes starting with fury.

His opponent waited until he arrived within fifteen paces with calmness,
and moreover with the certainty of victory, for he was a consummate
shot, and then fired.

The ball grazed the young man's cheek, piercing his skin and making it
bleed; he stopped an instant, and then continued advancing. The seconds
turned terribly pale. The duke dropped his pistol and stood awaiting his
death with a bravery tinged with affectation and pride.

Gonzalo came forward precipitately until within two steps from his
adversary. At that moment a rush of blood blinded him; his athletic
temperament overcame his reason, his eyes shone with the glaring look
of a wild beast, his lips trembled, his face contracted in a fearful
manner, and, casting the pistol far from him, he leaped upon the traitor
like a tiger. The duke, unable to resist the shock of the Colossus, was
leveled to the ground. Then, roaring with rage, Gonzalo proceeded to
kick him in the ribs. The seconds rushed to stop him, and the choleric
Golarza caught him a blow on the head, to which Gonzalo seemed quite
oblivious. Peña, indignant, raised his stick and directed a blow at
Golarza. The Marquis of Soldevilla then gave another to Peña; and the
whole party, mad with fury, began a hand-to-hand fight, while Gonzalo,
satiating his pent-up thirst for vengeance, reveled in pummeling the
well-nigh inert form of the duke.

At that moment the clouds burst in a downpour of rain, which became so
heavy that the Marquis of Soldevilla quitted the field and repaired to
the house for shelter.

The circle broke up as if by magic, for Don Rudesindo and Peña and
Golarza followed his example.

However, before going off, it occurred to them to look and see how their
chiefs were getting on.

And by a unanimous movement of compassion, they seized hold of Gonzalo,
whose mad rage was not yet exhausted.

The grip of the gentlemen brought him back to reason. He gave one long,
sinister, astonished look, and then, without saying a word, he seized
his hat and turned to the gate of the estate, while the duke was carried
to the house in a dying condition.

The doctor summoned by Soldevilla (he had been shut up in a room during
the duel, so as to avoid being present) now made a careful examination
of the wounds and contusions of the injured man, and then declared his
condition very serious.

Peña and Don Rudesindo found Gonzalo in the carriage weeping in despair.

"I am a brute!" he said--"a brute! What will you think of me? I have
committed a shameful deed. Forgive me."

The friends did their best to calm him. In truth neither of them was so
shocked; for, after all, the conduct of the duke had been so villainous
that it deserved a villainous chastisement.

Peña during the drive even cut jokes on the splendid trouncing
administered to the grandee.

"There is no doubt, my boy, that grandees of strength can do more than
grandees of rank," he said in his bell-like voice, enunciating every
letter.

Gonzalo, like a great child that he was, passed from crying to laughing,
and after the first smile he gave long and loud guffaws at his friends'
jokes.

But the sight of his father-in-law's house plunged him again into
depression. He had satisfied his righteous anger, but there remained a
deep wound, of the anguish of which he had not yet been conscious, as
long as it had been stifled by the excitement of the rage which had
consumed him during those two days. Oh! those grotesque little towers
and minarets, witnesses of his honeymoon; they made him so melancholy
that it seemed as if some cruel hand were clutching at his heart within
his breast. His friends, divining his wish to be alone, went on to
Sarrio. Pablito was waiting for him at the house gate, and embraced him
effusively and enthusiastically.

"Have you killed him?" he asked in a low voice.

"I don't know--I think so," returned the young man in a still lower
tone. "And your father?"

"My father--he was here an instant ago--as soon as he saw you get out of
the carriage safe and sound he got into the landau, which was waiting,
ready, and went off to Sarrio."

Gonzalo guessed the purport of Don Rosendo's journey, and his gloominess
increased.

The two brothers-in-law then proceeded in silence to the house, and
straight up to Gonzalo's room.

At the end of some moments, after throwing himself on the sofa and
remaining motionless with his head sunk on his chest, he said to
Pablito:

"Forgive me, Pablo--but I want to be left alone, I am not equal to
talking now."

So the brother-in-law withdrew.

At the end of some time, the door was reopened without the young man
noticing it, and a shadow slipped toward him and placed upon the nearest
chair a tray with a cup and some plates.

"Oh, is that you, Cecilia?"

"Whether you like it or not, you must take something, for I am certain
you have not broken your fast," said the girl, dragging a little table
forward and placing the steaming soup upon it.

"How good you are, Cecilia!" he exclaimed, seizing one of her hands.
That exclamation was a cry of affection and enthusiasm, mingled with
remorse that he had ever been able to doubt her.

"How good you are! How good you are!" he repeated with tears in his
eyes. "What you did that night! Oh! Nobody else would have done it,
nobody else! A saint descended from heaven would not have done it--none
of those living about you are worthy to kiss the dust from your feet."

And the young man, moved by his own words, sobbed bitterly while
covering the hand he held with tears and kisses.

Cecilia, after turning first deep scarlet and then pale, said in a
somewhat cold and distant tone:

"Let go, let go," and at the same time quickly withdrew her hand.
Seeing that her brother-in-law was somewhat hurt, she hastened to add:

"Look here, the less we talk of these things, and, if possible, the less
we think of them, the better. The thing is now for you to take the soup.
Then I will bring you some biscuits and a sandwich--you will like that?"

"I have no appetite, Cecilia," he replied, making an effort to control
his emotion.

"You must try--"

"No, no; really I can not swallow anything just now."

"But if I ask you?" said the girl, and as she spoke a flush suffused her
face.

"Then, well then, I'll take it--nobody can refuse you anything," he
replied, taking the cup.

That gallant reply had a painful effect on Cecilia, and to avoid it
being noticed she quickly left the room.

The Duke of Tornos lay for two or three days between life and death. But
finally the fever left him, and the danger was over, although the
recovery was very long, because he had two ribs and a jawbone fractured,
besides terrible contusions in various parts of his body.

At the end of a month he was able to be moved to Madrid.




CHAPTER XXXIII

THE FINAL TRAGEDY


Gonzalo did not leave his father-in-law's house; and at the end of five
or six days after the duel, Don Rosendo returned from taking Ventura to
the Ocaña Convent. But his life was sad and depressed. He declined
Pablo's persuasions to go shooting or walking, and the thousand pretexts
made by his father-in-law and his friends, who came to see him at
Tejada, to induce him to get out, proved fruitless.

Although Gonzalo did not openly refuse to accompany his friends, he
managed to elude them and remained at home, where he sat alone.

His uncle, Don Melchor, came to see him, and advised him to travel for a
time; Gonzalo did not reject the idea, but he always postponed it on the
pretext of want of health.

Don Rosendo, upon the advice of Las Cuevas and other friends, decided to
move to Sarrio to see if the society of acquaintances might not cheer
the young man up a little. But all attempts to rouse him proved
failures. Gonzalo let himself be taken to town without offering any
objection, but he continued just as anxious to be alone, and to live
retired from social life.

He only went out early in the morning and took a few turns at the end of
the landing-stage, where he contemplated the sea with far-away eyes,
sometimes so full of sadness that they would have alarmed any onlooker.
As soon as the place became frequented, and the town awoke from its
sleep, he hastily returned home.

Why did he not leave Sarrio, the scene of his troubles, and go for a
time to Madrid, Paris, or London? This was the question asked by all the
people of the town, without receiving any satisfactory answer, nor was
it easy for one to be found. There are very few competent to explain the
secret origin, the final cause of human actions, because very few study
psychology, deeming it useless, and those who are endowed with an
understanding, both subtle and perspicacious, devote it solely to the
study of self-interest, so that hardly anybody sounds this magic casket
of feelings, desires, hopes, and contradictions called the human heart.

How ashamed Gonzalo would have been if any one had told him that he did
not leave Sarrio because he did not wish to quit the place associated
with his wife, whom he still adored in secret, while feigning to hate
her before the world! And nevertheless it was certainly so. As long as
he remained in that house, all the bonds uniting him to her did not
seem to be broken. The people about him were of her flesh and blood;
they loved her still, culpable as she was and they did not abuse her in
his presence.

Ventura seemed to have left part of herself in the rooms and in the
furniture; the bottles of essences and pots of pomades still stood
half-used on the dressing-table; some of her cloaks and hats were still
hanging on the pegs, and it seemed as if her fair, sunny head might
appear at any moment from behind the curtains, while the air was still
sweet with her favorite perfume. The husband, who had been disgracefully
outraged, inhaled with delight this atmosphere of his wife, and lived in
the shadow of her life, unwilling as he would have been to acknowledge
it; and he lived, moreover, in the hope of one day pardoning her. This
nobody knew--he had probably not formulated it to himself--nobody knew
it but Cecilia, whose eyes, sharpened by love, divined her
brother-in-law's most secret thoughts; and he evinced such an
affectionate, enthusiastic, venerating feeling for her that it might
easily have been confounded with love. Everybody's companionship, even
that of his uncle, bored him more than hers.

However cast down he was with sad thoughts, which made scalding tears
flow down his cheeks, the appearance of Cecilia in his room had a
calming, soothing effect upon his grief.

He followed her counsels with respect, and let himself be guided and
coaxed by her like a sick child. When she delayed coming to him he grew
impatient and made tender complaints about it, as if he had been a
devoted lover.

When she was in the room his eyes never left her for an instant, so
great was the influence of the charm or fascination she exercised on
him; those eyes expressed deep affection, admiration, respect,
enthusiasm; expressed, indeed, everything but love.

Cecilia read it all, but she could not see it without feeling the old
pain and bitterness. Her gentle spirit was occasionally momentarily
disturbed, and she seemed at times cold, irritable, and enigmatical, to
the great surprise and sorrow of Gonzalo, who tried to cheer her up, and
that with success. For the sad thought had had the same effect upon her
mind as the fall of a stone on the peaceful waters of a lake, but, like
the lake, her mind soon regained its purity and tranquillity.

One day, on suddenly entering the room of her brother-in-law, she found
him examining a revolver.

When he saw her he turned red, and tried to hide it in the table drawer,
which was open.

"What are you doing?"

"Nothing; looking for some papers in this drawer, I came across this
revolver, which I did not know I had, and so I am looking at it."

Cecilia did not believe what he said, and the anxiety caused her by the
incident made her keep a stricter watch on him.

Two months went by. Although the young man still persisted in his
isolated, gloomy sort of life, there were a few faint signs of
improvement. Once or twice he went out on horseback, and he talked to
his father-in-law of going to Italy, as he had never been there.

The fresh impulse given to his depressed being was due to a pleasant
thought, as pleasant as it was deceptive, and which he carefully kept
from everybody.

Nevertheless, one night, on taking an affectionate leave of his
sister-in-law, when retiring to rest, after much circumlocution and
turning crimson, he asked after Ventura.

"What news is there of her?"

Cecilia gave him a chilly answer in as few words as possible.

Poor Gonzalo! If he had known that the treacherous wife, after whom he
was asking, far from repenting, was furious against her family, covering
them all with opprobrium, and threatening to go off with the first man
at hand as soon as she came out of retreat, and shocking the Superior of
the Convent with her language and pride.

From that day Gonzalo lost his aversion of referring to his wife,
asking sometimes after her, and liking to mention her in conversation,
but Cecilia still maintained the cold tone of her replies, quickly
changing the subject.

What Don Rosendo had feared from the letters from Ocaña at last
happened.

The Superior of the Convent informed him one day that Ventura had
escaped from the retreat, and, according to all reports, it was with the
Duke of Tornos.

"The great humanitarian" (as he was termed by "The Light," on a certain
occasion) received the news with stoical fortitude. In fact, what did
any purely individual sorrow signify in comparison with universal sorrow
in the slow and sure march of humanity to its destiny? He had recently
read a celebrated pamphlet called, "The March of the World," from the
pen of a French writer, and, with his brain refreshed and illuminated
with its grand historical synthesis, he found strength to bear the blow.

Nevertheless, he tried to keep the news from his son-in-law, as he had
not the same confidence in the loftiness of his spirit and the width of
his views. It was therefore kept secret for some days, but suddenly it
became current news in the town, without any one knowing who started it.
Gonzalo, who always went early in the morning to the Club, read it in a
paragraph in "The Youth of Sarrio," which was as infamous as it was
hypocritical.

"It is said in the town," it ran, "that a lady, the heroine of a certain
romantic drama, enacted not long ago, has fled with her lover from the
asylum in which her family had secluded her. We shall be sorry if this
report be true, as it will affect certain persons who are well known and
much esteemed in Sarriensan society."

Gonzalo felt that his heart was broken--the last ray of hope was gone.

He let the paper fall, and with a nervous smile, and in a strange, sharp
voice, said to old Feliciano Gomez, who was the only person present:

"Do you know that my brute of a wife has gone off with her lover?"

Don Feliciano looked at him in surprise, for, although little versed in
smiles, he was taken aback at seeing the young man smile like that, and
he replied sadly:

"Yes, Gonzalin; yes, I knew that it wasn't all over so soon--But,
really, after what happened, this final blow ought not to cause you
surprise. Once the rein is broken you can always imagine what will be
the end."

"And what for me. What--?" exclaimed the unhappy man, with the same
smile, which expressed the ill-restrained excitement of body. "Let her
go--Very well! let her go with God's blessing. I have nothing against
it--Ah! if the law only permitted me to marry! A month would not elapse
without my doing so--And why not? we will see, and why can I not do so?
Anyhow, if I can't marry for good, I can take up with somebody. I will
carry on with some pretty girl, eh, Don Feliciano? And the devil take
the rest!--for if she be bad by profession, my wife is so from choice."

While making these ugly remarks, he walked up and down the room, threw
off his hat, shrugged his shoulders, and gesticulated wildly.

Finally he roared with laughter.

"Look here, Gonzalin," said Don Feliciano; "you have just weathered a
storm; better weather is in store. There is always good after bad. The
things of the world have to be taken easily, my dear. What is the good
of putting one's self out, and upsetting one's digestion? Look at me.
Last month I lost a ship. Everybody came to condole with me, thinking I
must be in despair, and I said to them:

"'It is true I lost the "Juanita," but if I had lost the "Carmen,"
wouldn't it be much worse? for it might have been the one as much as the
other, as both were afloat.' You have had a great blow--but keep up.
Would it not be much worse if you were ill? You must think of that, my
boy. Health is the first thing--you eat well, drink well, and those are
the first things; the rest will all come right."

Gonzalo left the club without taking leave of the good Feliciano, who
was still speaking.

At home he told Don Rosendo of Ventura's flight, and, contrary to
everybody's expectation, he did not seem to feel it much. On the
contrary, from that day he showed signs of cheering up, and of going a
little into society, which caused some surprise in the place.

He began paying visits to his friends, going out to coffee, walking in
the streets, joking and discussing. There was no more talk of going
away. To the astonishment of the town, at one of the balls of the
Lyceum, he danced all night like a young fellow at his first dance.

Nevertheless, Cecilia was very anxious. The animation of her
brother-in-law was so strange, that it seemed more like an attack of
nerves. Above all, this strange smile seemed like a grimace that had not
left his lips since reading the paragraph in "The Youth of Sarrio," and
it sometimes made her shudder.

The natural reaction came: after the days of insane excitement, he
became a prey to a profound and gloomy depression. He remained three
days in his room, hardly touching anything that Cecilia brought him,
and, what was worse still, without being able to sleep. With open,
vacant eyes, he passed hours and hours stretched on his bed gazing into
the dark.

On the third night he struck a light, dressed himself, wrote a long
letter to his uncle, and one to Cecilia. When they were sealed, and laid
on the table so as to be easily seen, he took out a Havana and, after
lighting it at the candle, began walking up and down the room.

Before finishing the cigar he threw it away, opened the table-drawer and
drew out the revolver which he kept there. On taking it to the light, he
saw it was unloaded, which fact surprised him, because he was certain he
had loaded it about a month before. What a strange thing! Then he
recollected that Cecilia had seen it in his hand, and a smile wreathed
his lips. He then took up the cartridge box, and found it empty; the
cartridges were all gone!

He stood pensive and motionless for some time. Then, as if awakening
from a sleep, he shook his head and gave a sigh. After this, he put on
his hat, opened the door, and very cautiously descended the staircase.
On passing the door of the first floor he put his ear to it, and stood
listening for a moment with his face convulsed and his hair on end. He
thought he heard the voice of his wife calling him from within.

The hallucination having passed, he descended the stairs, opened the
outside door with the key hanging in the passage, and passed into the
street.

It was not yet dawn, but in the east there was a little line of light
that heralded the day. The morning was fresh, a sea-mist of fine rain
was falling. He walked to the harbor without any hesitation, mounted the
upper wall and looked out to sea, the horizon not being very extensive
just then owing to the fog.

A northeast wind had been blowing for the past few days, which had made
the sea very rough. Great, grand waves came rolling in from a distance,
and dashed their gigantic forms against the end of the mole, and the
foam flew straight up.

The eyes of the young man were soon directed to a launch about to enter
the harbor, as it danced like a walnut shell upon the waves. Its
entrance interested him, and he followed all its peripatetics with as
much attention as if he were concerned in it.

At the end of a quarter of an hour, when the entrance to the harbor was
effected, his thoughts resumed their course, and sighing and murmuring
"Come," he went forward and leaned against the wall. As the tide rose
higher, a larger wave than the rest drenched him with its foam. The
unexpected bath was agreeable to him, as it refreshed him physically. He
stood waiting for some time to see if another would come with equal
force, but none came, so he continued his walk.

Arriving at the end of the mole he threw himself down on the mole and
fixed his melancholy gaze on the waves coming in.

It was the same spot where, a few years previously, he had had the
conversation with his uncle about breaking off his engagement with
Cecilia and marrying Ventura.

The stern, severe words of the old man seemed now to reecho in his ears:

"God can not help the man who breaks his word. The journey is long, the
sea wide and powerful, and what is merely pretty is soon submerged in
the swell."

"How right my uncle was!" thought the young man, without turning his
eyes from the sea.

"Bah!" he muttered at the end of a few minutes, "if I had been a hundred
times in the same position I should have done the same. There are
fatalities. That woman has inoculated my blood with poison which can
only be ejected with its last drop."

He stood some time again lost in thought. The sea water, which had
immersed him, and the rain, which still incessantly fell, chilled him to
the bone. The morning dawned damp and foggy. It was not like that
beautiful night when, after talking with his uncle, he had then also
been plunged in thought. Then the magnificent splendor of the heavens
spangled with stars, the crystal clearness of the water, in which the
light of the moon was reflected, and the soft breeze whispered to him of
death--yea, but it was in sweet, harmonious, friendly strains, like the
voice of a friend calling him to rest. But now it was as if he heard a
cry of desolation, a threat: "Come, come, death is very sad, but life is
the saddest of all!"

"We must make an end of this," he said, raising his head. He moved
forward and stretched out his arms.

But at the moment, fearing that the instinct of self-preservation would
certainly make him swim, he stopped.

He looked all round in search of some weight, and his eyes fell upon the
anchor of a smack, which lay below on the lower wall. He jumped down,
seized it, cut a piece of rope from a launch with his knife, lashed it
to the anchor, and, like a gymnast anxious to exhibit to the public the
prodigious power of his muscles, he scaled the steps with his burden.
Once there he tied the cord to his neck, put his foot upon the wall,
and, with the anchor in his arms, he precipitated himself into the deep.
His colossal form made a great vacuum in the waters, which closed
immediately over him. The deep sea extinguished that spark of life with
the same indifference as it had so many others.

A sailor, seeing him from a distance, ran crying:

"A man in the water!"

Three or four others from boats at hand followed, and in a few minutes
there was a crowd of twenty or thirty at the end of the landing-stage.

"Who was it? Do you know him?" was asked of him who had seen him.

"I think it was Don Gonzalo."

"The mayor?"

"Yes."

"Very likely, very likely--Oh, these women!"

The news spread rapidly through the town, and a crowd of people hastened
to the port. Two men in a boat prodded with a pole in the water's
depths, without encountering the body of the unhappy young man. At last
they came across it, and with the help of a hook they brought it to
light, just as Melchor, upset, excited, and hatless, arrived at the port
to receive the terrible blow.

"Son of my heart!" cried the poor old man when he saw his nephew's body
in the water; then utterly collapsing, he fell unconscious into the arms
of the people about him.

The corpse of the suicide was laid in the town hall awaiting the arrival
of the justice of the peace, and the spectacle made a profound
impression upon the bystanders, who numbered among them persons from the
rival parties.

After the arrival of the justice of the peace, due instructions were
given and the body was placed on a truck and carried to its home, as
Don Rosendo claimed it on hearing the news. It was a very sad procession
that passed through the town; the people crowded the windows with pale
and sad faces, for Gonzalo was a universal favorite.

Don Rosendo was overwhelmed with grief, and, not wishing to see the
corpse of his son-in-law, he shut himself in his room, but he gave
orders to have the body placed in the best drawing-room on a table
covered with velvet, and flowers and wreaths to be sent from all parts,
and preparations for a grand funeral to be made.

Cecilia, with one of those heroic efforts over body and mind which
characterized her, managed to bury her grief in the depths of her own
heart. She was seen looking livid, but tranquil, going about the house,
doing what was necessary for the reception of her brother-in-law's body.
When it arrived she herself helped to arrange it after it had been
shrouded in its winding sheet. She covered it with flowers, she lighted
the candles, and she draped the room with black. Then she arranged for a
Sister of Charity to share the watch by the corpse with herself.

At last they were left alone. They prayed for a long time on their
knees; and when the orisons were over, Cecilia asked the Sister to go to
the kitchen to order tea, as she was quite faint.

As soon as the Sister left the room, Cecilia rose quickly, drew out a
pair of scissors, cut a lock of her brother-in-law's hair and hid it in
her bosom; then she cut a tress from her own head, and, trembling with
agitation, she placed it between the crossed hands of the dead man.

Then, after gazing at him for an instant, she lowered her head and
covered the inanimate face with kisses--the first and the last that she
ever gave him.

Then the wife, the man's true and only wife, powerless to cope with such
a sorrow, fell senseless to the ground.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE END




MARIQUITA THE BALD

A Tale After The Style of an Old Chronicle

BY JUAN EUGENIO HARTZENBUSCH




MARIQUITA THE BALD


It is as sorry a matter to use the words of which one ignores the
meaning as it is a blemish for a man of sense to speak of what he knows
nothing about. I say this to those of you who may have the present story
in your hands, however often you may have happened to have heard
_Mariquita the Bald_ mentioned, and I swear by my doublet that you shall
soon know who Mariquita the Bald was, as well as I know who ate the
Christmas turkey, setting aside the surmise that it certainly must have
been a mouth.

I desire, therefore, to enlighten your ignorance of this subject, and
beg to inform you that the said noted Maria, Mariquita being the
diminutive of this name, was born in the District of Segovia, and in the
town of Sant Garcia, the which town is famed for the beauty of the
maidens reared within its walls, who for the most part have such gentle
and lovely faces, that may I behold such around me at the hour of my
death.

Maria's father was an honest farmer, by name Juan Lanas, a Christian old
man, and much beloved, and who had inherited no mean estate from his
forefathers, though with but little wit in his crown, a lack which was
the cause of much calamity to both the father and the daughter, for in
the times to which we have attained, God forgive me if it is not
necessary to have more of the knave than of the fool in one's
composition.

Now it came to pass that Juan Lanas, for the castigation of his sins,
must need commit himself to a lawsuit with one of his neighbors about a
vine stock which was worth about fifty maravedis; and Juan was in the
right, and the judges gave the verdict in his favor, so that he won his
case, excepting that the suit lasted no less than ten years and the
costs amounted to nothing less than fifty thousand maravedis, not to
speak of a disease of the eyes which after all was over left him blind.

When he found himself with diminished property and without his eyesight,
in sorrow and disgust he turned into money such part of his patrimony as
sufficed to rid him of the hungry herd of scriveners and lawyers, and
took his way to Toledo with his daughter, who was already entering upon
her sixteenth year, and had matured into one of the most beautiful,
graceful, and lovable damsels to be found throughout all Castile and the
kingdoms beyond. For she was white as the lily and red like the rose,
straight and tall of stature, and slender in the waist, with fair,
shapely hips; and again her foot and hand were plump and small to a
marvel, and she possessed a head of hair which reached to her knees. For
I knew the widow Sarmiento who was their housekeeper, and she told me
how she could scarcely clasp Mariquita's hair with both hands, and that
she could not comb the hair unless Maria stood up and the housekeeper
mounted on a footstool, for if Maria sat down, the long tresses swept
the ground, and therefore became all entangled.

And do not imagine, her beauty and grace being such, that she sinned
greatly in pride and levity, as is the wont of girls in this age. She
was as humble as a cloistered lay-sister, and as silent as if she were
not a woman, and patient as the sucking lamb, and industrious as the
ant, clean as the ermine, and pure as a saint of those times in which,
by the grace of the Most High, saintly women were born into the world.

But I must confide to you in friendship that our Mariquita was not a
little vain about her hair, and loved to display it, and for this
reason, now in the streets, now when on a visit, now when at mass, it is
said she used to subtly loosen her mantilla so that her tresses streamed
down her back, the while feigning forgetfulness and carelessness. She
never wore a hood, for she said it annoyed her and choked her; and every
time that her father reproached her for some deed deserving of
punishment and threatened to cut off her hair, I warrant you she
suffered three times more than after a lash from the whip, and would
then be good for three weeks successively; so much so that Juan Lanas,
perceiving her amendment, would laugh under his cloak, and when saying
his say to his gossips would tell them that his daughter, like the other
saint of Sicily, would reach heaven by her hair.

Having read so far, you must now know that Juan Lanas, the blind man,
with the change of district and dwelling did not change his judgment,
and if he was crack-brained at Sant Garcia, he remained crack-brained at
Toledo, consuming in this resort his money upon worthless drugs and
quacks which did not cure his blindness and impoverished him more and
more every day, so that if his daughter had not been so dexterous with
her fingers in making and embroidering garments of linen, wool, and
silk, I promise you that this miserable Juan would have had to go for
more than four Sundays without a clean shirt to put on or a mouthful to
eat, unless he had begged for it from door to door.

The years passed by to find Maria every day more beautiful, and her
father every day more blind and more desirous to see, until his
affliction and trouble took such forcible possession of his breast and
mind that Maria saw as clear as daylight that if her father did not
recover his sight, he would die of grief. Maria thereupon straightway
took her father and led him to the house of an Arabian physician of
great learning who dwelt at Toledo, and told the Moor to see if there
were any cure for the old man's sight. The Arabian examined and touched
Juan, and made this and that experiment with him, and everything was
concerted in that the physician swore great oaths by the heel-bone of
Mohammed that there was a complete certainty of curing Juan and making
him to see his daughter again, if only he, the physician, were paid for
the cure with five hundred maravedis all in gold.

A sad termination for such a welcome beginning, for the two unhappy
creatures, Juan and Maria, had neither maravedi nor cuarto in their
money box! So they went thence all downcast, and Maria never ceased
praying to his Holiness Saint John, and to the patron saint of our
country, his Holiness Saint James, to repair to their assistance in this
sad predicament.

"In what way," conjectured she--"in what way can I raise five hundred
maravedis to be quits with the worthy Moor who will give back his sight
to my poor old father? Ah! I have it. I am a pretty maid, and suitors
innumerable, commoners and nobles, pay their addresses and compliments
to me. But all are trifling youths who only care for love-making and
who seek light o' loves rather than spouses according to the law of the
Lord Jesus Christ. I remember, notwithstanding, that opposite our house
lives the sword-cutler, Master Palomo, who is always looking at me and
never speaks to me, and the Virgin assist me, he appears a man of very
good condition for a husband; but what maiden, unless she were
cross-eyed or hunchbacked, could like a man with such a flat nose, with
that skin the color of a ripe date, with those eyes like a dead calf's,
and with those huge hands, which are more like the paws of a wild beast
than the belongings of a person who with them should softly caress the
woman whom Destiny bestows upon him for a companion? 'Tis said that he
is no drunkard, nor cudgeler, nor dallier with women, nor a liar, and
that he is besides possessed of much property and very rich. Pity 'tis
that one who is so ugly and stiff-necked should unite such parts."

Thus turning the matter over and over in her mind, Maria together with
Juan reached their home, where was awaiting them an esquire in a long
mourning robe, who told Maria that the aunt of the Mayor of the city had
died in an honest estate and in the flower of her age, for she had not
yet completed her seventy years, and that the obsequies of this
sexagenarian damsel were to be performed the following day, on which
occasion her coffin would be carried to the church by maidens, and he
was come to ask Maria if she would please to be one of the bearers of
the dead woman, for which she would receive a white robe, and to eat,
and a ducat, and thanks into the bargain.

Maria, since she was a well-brought-up maid, replied that if it seemed
well to her father it would also seem well to her.

Juan accepted, and Maria was rejoiced to be able to make a display of
her hair, for it is well known that the maidens who bear another to the
grave walk with disheveled locks. And when on the morrow the tiring
women of the Mayoress arrayed Maria in a robe white as the driven snow
and fine as the skin of an onion; and when they girt her slender waist
with a sash of crimson silk, the ends of which hung down to the broad
hem of the skirt; and when they crowned her smooth and white forehead
with a wreath of white flowers, I warrant you that, what with the robe
and the sash and the wreath, and the beautiful streaming hair and her
lovely countenance and gracious mien, she seemed no female formed of
flesh and blood, but a superhuman creature or blessed resident of those
shining circles in which dwell the celestial hierarchies. The Mayor and
the other mourners stepped forth to see her, and all unceasingly praised
God, who was pleased to perform such miracles for the consolation and
solace of those living in this world.

There in a corner of the hall, motionless like a heap of broken stones,
stood one of the mutes with the hood of his long cloak covering his
head, so that nothing could be seen but his eyes, the which he kept
fixed on the fair damsel. The latter modestly lowered her eyes to the
ground with her head a little bent and her cheeks red from bashfulness,
although it pleased her no little to hear the praises of her beauty. At
this moment a screen was pushed aside, and there began to appear a huge
bulk of petticoats, which was nothing less than the person of the
Mayoress, for she was with child and drawing near to her time. And when
she saw Maria, she started, opened her eyes a hand's breadth wide, bit
her lips, and called hurriedly for her husband. They stepped aside for a
good while, and then hied them thence, and when they returned the mutes
and maidens had all gone.

While they are burying the defunct lady I must tell you, curious
readers, that the Mayor and Mayoress had been married for many years
without having any children, and they longed for them like the
countryman for rain in the month of May, and at last her hour of bliss
came to the Mayoress, to the great content of her husband.

Now, it was whispered that the said lady had always been somewhat
capricious; judge for yourselves what she would be now in the time of
her pregnancy! And as she was already on the way to fifty, she was more
than mediocrely bald and hairless, and on these very same days had
commissioned a woman barber, who lived in the odor of witchcraft, to
prepare for her some false hair, but it was not to be that of a dead
woman, for the Mayoress said very sensibly that if the hair belonged to
a dead woman who rejoiced in supreme glory, or was suffering for her
sins in purgatory, it would be profanation to wear any pledge of hers,
and if she were in hell, it was a terrible thing to wear on one's person
relics of one of the damned. And when the Mayoress saw the abundant
locks of Maria, she coveted them for herself, and it was for this reason
that she called to the Mayor to speak to her in private and besought him
eagerly to persuade Maria to allow herself to be shorn upon the return
from the burial.

"I warn you," said the Mayor, "that you are desirous of entering upon a
very knotty bargain, for the disheveled girl idolizes her hair in such
wise that she would sooner lose a finger than suffer one of her tresses
to be cut off."

"I warn you," replied the Mayoress, "that if on this very day the head
of this young girl is not shorn smooth beneath my hand as a melon, the
child to which I am about to give birth will have a head of hair on its
face, and if it happens to be a female, look you, a pretty daughter is
in store for you!"

"But bethink yourself that Maria will ask, who knows, a good few crowns
for this shaving."

"Bethink yourself, that if not, your heir or heiress, begotten after so
many years' marriage, will come amiss; and bear in mind, by the way,
that we are not so young as to hope to replace this by another."

Upon this she turned her back to the Mayor, and went to her apartment
crying out: "I want the hair, I must have the hair, and if I do not get
the hair, by my halidom I shall never become a mother."

In the meantime the funeral had taken place without any novelty to
mention, excepting that if in the streets any loose fellow in the crowd
essayed to annoy the fair Maria, the hooded mute, of whom we made
mention before, quickly drew from beneath his cloak a strap, with which
he gave a lash to the insolent rogue without addressing one word to him,
and then walked straight on as if nothing had happened. When all the
mourners returned, the Mayor seized hold of Maria's hand and said to
her:

"And now, fair maid, let us withdraw for a little while into this other
apartment," and thus talking while in motion he brought her into his
wife's private tiring-room, and sat himself down in a chair and bent his
head and stroked his beard with the mien of one who is studying what
beginning to give to his speech. Maria, a little foolish and confused,
remained standing in front of the Mayor, and she also humbly lowered
before him her eyes, black as the sloe; and to occupy herself with
something, gently fingered the ends of the sash which girded her waist
and hung down over her skirt, not knowing what to expect from the grave
mien and long silence of the Mayor, who, raising his eyes and looking up
at Maria, when he beheld her in so modest a posture, devised thence a
motive with which to begin, saying:

"Forsooth, Maria, so modest and pious is thy bearing, that it is easy to
see thou art preparing thyself to become a black wimpled nun. And if it
be so, as I presume it to be, I now offer of my own accord to dispose of
thy entry into the cloisters without any dowry, on condition that thou
dost give me something that thou hast on thy head, and which then will
not be necessary for thee."

"Nay, beshrew me, Sir Mayor," replied Maria, "for I durst not think that
the Lord calls upon me to take that step, for then my poor father would
remain in the world without the staff of his old age."

"Then, now, I desire to give thee some wise counsel, maid Maria. Thou
dost gain thy bread with great fatigue, thou shouldst make use of thy
time as much as is possible. Now one of thy neighbors hath told me, that
in the dressing of thy hair, thou doth waste every day more than an
hour. It would be better far if thou didst spend this hour on thy work
rather than in the dressing and braiding which thou dost to thy hair."

"That is true, Sir Mayor," replied Maria, turning as red as a carnation,
"but, look you, it is not my fault if I have a wealth of tresses, the
combing and plaiting of which necessitates so long a time every
morning."

"I tell thee it is thy fault," retorted the Mayor, "for if thou didst
cut off this mane, thou would save thyself all this combing and
plaiting, and thus would have more time for work, and so gain more
money, and would also give no occasion to people to call thee vain. They
even say that the Devil will some day carry thee off by thy hair. Nay,
do not be distressed, for I already perceive the tears gathering in thy
eyes, for thou hast them indeed very ready at hand; I admonish thee for
thine own good without any self-interest. Cut thy hair off, shear
thyself, shave thyself, good Maria, and to allay the bitterness of the
shearing, I will give fifty maravedis, always on condition that thou
dost hand me over the hair."

When Maria at first heard this offer of so small a sum for this her
hair, it seemed to her a jest of the Mayor's, and she smiled right
sweetly while she dried her tears, repeating:

"You will give me fifty maravedis if I shave myself?"

Now it appeared to the Mayor (who, it is said, was not gifted with all
the prudence of Ulysses) that that smile signified that the maid was not
satisfied with so small a price, and he added:

"If thou will not be content with fifty maravedis, I will give thee a
hundred."

Then Maria saw some hangings of the apartment moving in front of her,
and, perceiving a bulky protuberance, she immediately divined that the
Mayoress was hiding behind there, and that the protuberance was caused
by her portly form. She now discovered the Mayor's design, and that it
was probably a caprice of his spouse, and she made a vow not to suffer
herself to be shorn unless she acquired by these means the five hundred
maravedis needful to pay the Arabian physician who would give her father
back his eyesight.

Then the Mayor raised his price from a hundred maravedis to a hundred
and fifty, and afterward to two hundred, and Maria continued her sweet
smiling, shaking of the head and gestures, and every time that the Mayor
bid higher and Maria feigned to be reluctant, she almost hoped that the
Mayor would withdraw from his proposition, for the great grief it caused
her to despoil herself of that precious ornament, notwithstanding that
by means of it she might gain her father's health. Finally the Mayor,
anxious to conclude the treaty, for he saw the stirring of the
curtains, and knew by them the anxiety and state of mind of the
listener, closed by saying:

"Go to, hussy, I will give thee five hundred maravedis; see, once and
for all, if thou canst agree to these terms."

"Be it so," replied Maria, sighing as if her soul would flee from her
flesh with these words--"be it so, so long that nobody doth know that I
remain bald."

"I will give my word for it," said the Mayoress, stepping from behind
the curtains with a pair of sharp shears in her hands and a wrapper over
her arm.

When Maria saw the scissors she turned as yellow as wax, and when they
told her to sit down on the sacrificial chair, she felt herself grow
faint and had to ask for a drink of water; and when they tied the
wrapper round her throat it is related that she would have immediately
torn it asunder if her courage had not failed her. And when at the first
movement of the shears she felt the cold iron against her skull, I tell
you it seemed to her as if they were piercing her heart with a bright
dagger.

It is possible that she did not keep her head still for a moment while
this tonsuring was taking place; she moved it in spite of herself, now
to one side, now to another, to flee from the clipping scissors, of
which the rude cuts and the creaking axis wounded her ears. Her posture
and movements, however, were of no avail to the poor shorn maiden, and
the pertinacious shearer, with the anxiety and covetousness of a
pregnant woman satisfying a caprice, seized the hair well, or ill, by
handfuls, and went on bravely clipping, and the locks fell on to the
white wrapper, slipping down thence till they reached the ground.

At last the business came to an end, and the Mayoress, who was beside
herself with joy, caressingly passed the palm of her hand again and
again over the maid's bald head from the front to the back, saying:

"By my mother's soul, I have shorn you so regularly and close to root,
that the most skilful barber could not have shorn you better. Get up and
braid the hair while my husband goes to get the money and I your
clothes, so that you can leave the house without any one perceiving it."

The Mayor and Mayoress went out of the room, and Maria, as soon as she
found herself alone, went to look at herself in a mirror that hung
there; and when she saw herself bald she lost the patience she had had
until then, and groaned with rage and struck herself, and even tried to
wrench off her ears, which appeared to her now outrageously large,
although they were not so in reality. She stamped upon her hair and
cursed herself for having ever consented to lose it, without
remembering her father, and just as if she had no father at all. But as
it is a quality of human nature to accept what can not be altered, poor
angry Maria calmed down little by little, and she picked up the hair
from the ground and bound it together and braided it into great ropes,
not without kissing it and lamenting over it many times.

The Mayor and the Mayoress returned, he with the money and she with the
every-day clothes of Maria, who undressed and folded her white robe in a
kerchief, put on her old gown, hid herself with her shawl to the eyes,
and walked, moaning, to the house of the Moor, without noticing that the
man with the hood over his head was following behind her, and that when
she, in a moment of forgetfulness, lowered her shawl through the habit
she had of displaying her tresses, her bald head could be plainly seen.

The Moor received the five hundred maravedis with that good will with
which money is always received, and told Maria to bring Juan Lanas to
his house to stay there so long as there was any risk in the cure. Maria
went to fetch the old man, and kept silence as to her shorn head so as
not to grieve him, and while Juan remained the physician's guest, Maria
dared not leave her home except after nightfall and then well enveloped;
this, however, did not hinder her being followed by the muffled-up man.

One evening the Moor told her in secret that the next morning he would
remove the bandages from Juan's eyes. Maria went to bed that night with
great rejoicing, but thought to herself that when her father saw her
(which would be with no little pleasure) he would be pleased three or
four times more if he could see her with the pretty head-dress which she
used to wear in her native town.

Amidst such caviling she donned the next day her best petticoat and
ribands to hie to the Arabian's house; and while she was sitting down to
shoe herself she of a sudden felt something like a hood closing over her
head, and, turning round, she saw behind her the muffled-up man of
before, who, throwing aside his cloak, discovered himself to be the
sword-cutler, Master Palomo, who, without speaking, presented Maria with
a little Venetian mirror, in which she looked and saw herself with her
own hair and garb in such wise that she wondered for a good time if it
were not a dream that the Mayoress had shorn her. The fact was, that
Master Palomo was a friend of the old woman barber, and had seen in her
house Maria's tresses on the very same afternoon of the morning in which
he saw Maria was bald, and, keeping silence upon the matter, had
wheedled the old woman into keeping Maria's hair for him, and dressing
for the Mayoress some other hair of the same hue which the crone had
from a dead woman--a bargain by which the crafty old dame acquired many
a bright crown.

The story relates that as soon as Maria regained her much-lamented and
sighed-for hair by the hands of the gallant sword-cutler, the Master
appeared to her much less ugly than before, and I do not know if it
tells that from that moment she began to look on him with more favorable
eyes, but in sooth it is a fact that upon his asking her to accept his
escort to the Moor's house, she gave her assent, and the two set out
hand in hand, the maiden holding her head up free from mufflers. As they
both entered the physician's apartment her father threw himself into
Maria's arms, crying:

"Glory to God, I see thee now, my beloved daughter. How tall and
beautiful thou art grown! Verily, it is worth while to become blind for
five years to see one's daughter matured thus! Now that I see daylight
again, it is only right that I should no longer be a burden to thee. I
shall work for myself, for as for thee it is already time for thee to
marry."

"For this very purpose am I come," broke in at this opportune moment the
silent sword-cutler; "I, as you will have already recognized by my
voice, am your neighbor, Master Palomo. I love Maria, and ask you for
her hand."

"Lackaday, Master, but your exterior is not very prepossessing.
Howbeit, if Maria doth accept you, I am content."

"I," replied Maria, wholly abashed, and smoothing the false hair (which
then weighed upon her head and heart like a burden of five
hundred-weight)--"I, so may God enlighten me, for I dare not venture to
reply."

Palomo took her right hand without saying anything, and as he did so
Maria looked at the Master's wrists, and observed the wristbands of his
shirt, neatly embroidered, and with some suspicion and beating of her
heart said to him:

"If you wish to please me, good neighbor, tell me by what seamstress is
this work."

"It is the work," replied the Master, jocularly--"the work of a pretty
maiden who for five years has toiled for my person, albeit she hath not
known it till now."

"Now I perceive," said Maria, "how that all the women who have come to
give me linen to sew and embroider were sent by you, and that is why
they paid me more than is customary."

The Master did not reply, but he smiled and held out his arms to Maria.
Maria threw herself into them, embracing him very caressingly; and Juan
himself said to the two:

"In good sooth, you are made one for the other."

"By my troth, my beloved one," continued the sword-cutler after a while,
"if my countenance had only been more pleasing, I should not have been
silent toward you for so many long days, nor would I have been content
with gazing at you from afar. I should have spoken to you, you would
have made me the confidant of your troubles, and I would have given you
the five hundred maravedis for the cure of your good father." And
whispering softly into her ear, he added, "And then you would not have
passed that evil moment under the hands of the Mayoress. But if you fear
that she may break the promise she made to you to keep silence as to
your cropped head, let us, if it please you, set out for Seville, where
nobody knows you, and thus--"

"No more," exclaimed Maria, resolutely throwing on the ground the hair,
which Juan picked up all astonished. "Send the hair to the Mayoress,
since it was for this and not for that of the dead woman that she paid
so dearly. For I, to cure myself of my vanity, now make a vow, with your
good permission, to go shorn all my life; such artificial adornments are
little befitting to the wives of honest burghers."

"But rely upon it," replied the Master-cutler, "that as soon as it is
known that you have no hair, the girls of the city, envious of your
beauty, will give you the nickname of _Mariquita the Bald_!"

"They may do so," replied Maria, "and that they may see that I do not
care a fig for this or any other nickname, I swear to you that from this
day forth I will not suffer anybody to call me by another name than
_Mariquita the Bald_."

This was the event that rendered so famous throughout all Castile the
beautiful daughter of good Juan Lanas, who in effect married Master
Palomo, and became one of the most honorable and prolific women of the
most illustrious city of Toledo.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Fourth Estate, vol. 2, by 
Armando Palacio Valdés

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FOURTH ESTATE, VOL. 2 ***

***** This file should be named 38394-8.txt or 38394-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/3/9/38394/

Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images available at The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
