between the Rue d'Artois and the Passage des Panoramas she poured her
heart out into mine. I did not feel old once during that delightful
morning; I felt as light as a feather. I told her how you had given the
banknote to me; it moved my darling to tears. But what can this be on
your chimney-piece?" said Father Goriot at last. Rastignac had showed no
sign, and he was dying of impatience.

Eugene stared at his neighbor in dumb and dazed bewilderment. He thought
of Vautrin, of that duel to be fought to-morrow morning, and of this
realization of his dearest hopes, and the violent contrast between the
two sets of ideas gave him all the sensations of nightmare. He went to
the chimney-piece, saw the little square case, opened it, and found
a watch of Breguet's make wrapped in paper, on which these words were
written:


  "I want you to think of me every hour, _because_...

                                          "DELPHINE."


That last word doubtless contained an allusion to some scene that
had taken place between them. Eugene felt touched. Inside the gold
watch-case his arms had been wrought in enamel. The chain, the key, the
workmanship and design of the trinket were all such as he had imagined,
for he had long coveted such a possession. Father Goriot was radiant. Of
course he had promised to tell his daughter every little detail of the
scene and of the effect produced upon Eugene by her present; he shared
in the pleasure and excitement of the young people, and seemed to be not
the least happy of the three. He loved Rastignac already for his own as
well as for his daughter's sake.

"You must go and see her; she is expecting you this evening. That great
lout of an Alsatian is going to have supper with his opera-dancer. Aha!
he looked very foolish when my attorney let him know where he was. He
says he idolizes my daughter, does he? He had better let her alone, or I
will kill him. To think that my Delphine is his"--he heaved a sigh--"it
is enough to make me murder him, but it would not be manslaughter to
kill that animal; he is a pig with a calf's brains.--You will take me
with you, will you not?"

"Yes, dear Father Goriot; you know very well how fond I am of you----"

"Yes, I do know very well. You are not ashamed of me, are you? Not you!
Let me embrace you," and he flung his arms around the student's neck.

"You will make her very happy; promise me that you will! You will go to
her this evening, will you not?"

"Oh! yes. I must go out; I have some urgent business on hand."

"Can I be of any use?"

"My word, yes! Will you go to old Taillefer's while I go to Mme. de
Nucingen? Ask him to make an appointment with me some time this evening;
it is a matter of life and death."

"Really, young man!" cried Father Goriot, with a change of countenance;
"are you really paying court to his daughter, as those simpletons were
saying down below?... _Tonnerre de dieu!_ you have no notion what a tap
_a la Goriot_ is like, and if you are playing a double game, I shall put
a stop to it by one blow of the fist... Oh! the thing is impossible!"

"I swear to you that I love but one woman in the world," said the
student. "I only knew it a moment ago."

"Oh! what happiness!" cried Goriot.

"But young Taillefer has been called out; the duel comes off to-morrow
morning, and I have heard it said that he may lose his life in it."

"But what business is it of yours?" said Goriot.

"Why, I ought to tell him so, that he may prevent his son from putting
in an appearance----"

Just at that moment Vautrin's voice broke in upon them; he was standing
at the threshold of his door and singing:

     "Oh! Richard, oh my king!
      All the world abandons thee!
      Broum! broum! broum! broum! broum!

      The same old story everywhere,
      A roving heart and a... tra la la."

"Gentlemen!" shouted Christophe, "the soup is ready, and every one is
waiting for you."

"Here," Vautrin called down to him, "come and take a bottle of my
Bordeaux."

"Do you think your watch is pretty?" asked Goriot. "She has good taste,
hasn't she? Eh?"

Vautrin, Father Goriot, and Rastignac came downstairs in company, and,
all three of them being late, were obliged to sit together.

Eugene was as distant as possible in his manner to Vautrin during
dinner; but the other, so charming in Mme. Vauquer's opinion, had never
been so witty. His lively sallies and sparkling talk put the whole
table in good humor. His assurance and coolness filled Eugene with
consternation.

"Why, what has come to you to-day?" inquired Mme. Vauquer. "You are as
merry as a skylark."

"I am always in spirits after I have made a good bargain."

"Bargain?" said Eugene.

"Well, yes, bargain. I have just delivered a lot of goods, and I shall
be paid a handsome commission on them--Mlle. Michonneau," he went on,
seeing that the elderly spinster was scrutinizing him intently, "have
you any objection to some feature in my face, that you are making those
lynx eyes at me? Just let me know, and I will have it changed to oblige
you... We shall not fall out about it, Poiret, I dare say?" he added,
winking at the superannuated clerk.

"Bless my soul, you ought to stand as model for a burlesque Hercules,"
said the young painter.

"I will, upon my word! if Mlle. Michonneau will consent to sit as the
Venus of Pere-Lachaise," replied Vautrin.

"There's Poiret," suggested Bianchon.

"Oh! Poiret shall pose as Poiret. He can be a garden god!" cried
Vautrin; "his name means a pear----"

"A sleepy pear!" Bianchon put in. "You will come in between the pear and
the cheese."

"What stuff are you all talking!" said Mme. Vauquer; "you would do
better to treat us to your Bordeaux; I see a glimpse of a bottle there.
It would keep us all in a good humor, and it is good for the stomach
besides."

"Gentlemen," said Vautrin, "the Lady President calls us to order. Mme.
Couture and Mlle. Victorine will take your jokes in good part, but
respect the innocence of the aged Goriot. I propose a glass or two of
Bordeauxrama, rendered twice illustrious by the name of Laffite, no
political allusions intended.--Come, you Turk!" he added, looking at
Christophe, who did not offer to stir. "Christophe! Here! What, you
don't answer to your own name? Bring us some liquor, Turk!"

"Here it is, sir," said Christophe, holding out the bottle.

Vautrin filled Eugene's glass and Goriot's likewise, then he
deliberately poured out a few drops into his own glass, and sipped it
while his two neighbors drank their wine. All at once he made a grimace.

"Corked!" he cried. "The devil! You can drink the rest of this,
Christophe, and go and find another bottle; take from the right-hand
side, you know. There are sixteen of us; take down eight bottles."

"If you are going to stand treat," said the painter, "I will pay for a
hundred chestnuts."

"Oh! oh!"

"Booououh!"

"Prrr!"

These exclamations came from all parts of the table like squibs from a
set firework.

"Come, now, Mama Vauquer, a couple of bottles of champagne," called
Vautrin.

"_Quien!_ just like you! Why not ask for the whole house at once. A
couple of bottles of champagne; that means twelve francs! I shall never
see the money back again, I know! But if M. Eugene has a mind to pay for
it, I have some currant cordial."

"That currant cordial of hers is as bad as a black draught," muttered
the medical student.

"Shut up, Bianchon," exclaimed Rastignac; "the very mention of black
draught makes me feel----. Yes, champagne, by all means; I will pay for
it," he added.

"Sylvie," called Mme. Vauquer, "bring in some biscuits, and the little
cakes."

"Those little cakes are mouldy graybeards," said Vautrin. "But trot out
the biscuits."

The Bordeaux wine circulated; the dinner table became a livelier scene
than ever, and the fun grew fast and furious. Imitations of the cries
of various animals mingled with the loud laughter; the Museum official
having taken it into his head to mimic a cat-call rather like the
caterwauling of the animal in question, eight voices simultaneously
struck up with the following variations:

"Scissors to grind!"

"Chick-weeds for singing bir-ds!"

"Brandy-snaps, ladies!"

"China to mend!"

"Boat ahoy!"

"Sticks to beat your wives or your clothes!"

"Old clo'!"

"Cherries all ripe!"

But the palm was awarded to Bianchon for the nasal accent with which he
rendered the cry of "Umbrellas to me-end!"

A few seconds later, and there was a head-splitting racket in the
room, a storm of tomfoolery, a sort of cats' concert, with Vautrin
as conductor of the orchestra, the latter keeping an eye the while on
Eugene and Father Goriot. The wine seemed to have gone to their heads
already. They leaned back in their chairs, looking at the general
confusion with an air of gravity, and drank but little; both of them
were absorbed in the thought of what lay before them to do that evening,
and yet neither of them felt able to rise and go. Vautrin gave a side
glance at them from time to time, and watched the change that came over
their faces, choosing the moment when their eyes drooped and seemed
about to close, to bend over Rastignac and to say in his ear:--

"My little lad, you are not quite shrewd enough to outwit Papa Vautrin
yet, and he is too fond of you to let you make a mess of your affairs.
When I have made up my mind to do a thing, no one short of Providence
can put me off. Aha! we were for going round to warn old Taillefer,
telling tales out of school! The oven is hot, the dough is kneaded, the
bread is ready for the oven; to-morrow we will eat it up and whisk away
the crumbs; and we are not going to spoil the baking? ... No, no, it is
all as good as done! We may suffer from a few conscientious scruples,
but they will be digested along with the bread. While we are having our
forty winks, Colonel Count Franchessini will clear the way to Michel
Taillefer's inheritance with the point of his sword. Victorine will come
in for her brother's money, a snug fifteen thousand francs a year. I
have made inquiries already, and I know that her late mother's property
amounts to more than three hundred thousand----"

Eugene heard all this, and could not answer a word; his tongue seemed
to be glued to the roof of his mouth, an irresistible drowsiness was
creeping over him. He still saw the table and the faces round it, but it
was through a bright mist. Soon the noise began to subside, one by one
the boarders went. At last, when their numbers had so dwindled that the
party consisted of Mme. Vauquer, Mme. Couture, Mlle. Victorine, Vautrin,
and Father Goriot, Rastignac watched as though in a dream how Mme.
Vauquer busied herself by collecting the bottles, and drained the
remainder of the wine out of each to fill others.

"Oh! how uproarious they are! what a thing it is to be young!" said the
widow.

These were the last words that Eugene heard and understood.

"There is no one like M. Vautrin for a bit of fun like this," said
Sylvie. "There, just hark at Christophe, he is snoring like a top."

"Good-bye, mamma," said Vautrin; "I am going to a theatre on the
boulevard to see M. Marty in _Le Mont Sauvage_, a fine play taken
from _Le Solitaire_.... If you like, I will take you and these two
ladies----"

"Thank you; I must decline," said Mme. Couture.

"What! my good lady!" cried Mme. Vauquer, "decline to see a play founded
on the _Le Solitaire_, a work by Atala de Chateaubriand? We were so fond
of that book that we cried over it like Magdalens under the _line-trees_
last summer, and then it is an improving work that might edify your
young lady."

"We are forbidden to go to the play," answered Victorine.

"Just look, those two yonder have dropped off where they sit," said
Vautrin, shaking the heads of the two sleepers in a comical way.

He altered the sleeping student's position, settled his head more
comfortably on the back of his chair, kissed him warmly on the forehead,
and began to sing:

     "Sleep, little darlings;
      I watch while you slumber."

"I am afraid he may be ill," said Victorine.

"Then stop and take care of him," returned Vautrin. "'Tis your duty as
a meek and obedient wife," he whispered in her ear. "The young fellow
worships you, and you will be his little wife--there's your fortune for
you. In short," he added aloud, "they lived happily ever afterwards,
were much looked up to in all the countryside, and had a numerous
family. That is how all the romances end.--Now, mamma," he went on, as
he turned to Madame Vauquer and put his arm round her waist, "put on
your bonnet, your best flowered silk, and the countess' scarf, while I
go out and call a cab--all my own self."

And he started out, singing as he went:

     "Oh! sun! divine sun!
      Ripening the pumpkins every one."

"My goodness! Well, I'm sure! Mme. Couture, I could live happily in a
garret with a man like that.--There, now!" she added, looking round for
the old vermicelli maker, "there is that Father Goriot half seas over.
_He_ never thought of taking me anywhere, the old skinflint. But he will
measure his length somewhere. My word! it is disgraceful to lose his
senses like that, at his age! You will be telling me that he couldn't
lose what he hadn't got--Sylvie, just take him up to his room!"

Sylvie took him by the arm, supported him upstairs, and flung him just
as he was, like a package, across the bed.

"Poor young fellow!" said Mme. Couture, putting back Eugene's hair that
had fallen over his eyes; "he is like a young girl, he does not know
what dissipation is."

"Well, I can tell you this, I know," said Mme. Vauquer, "I have taken
lodgers these thirty years, and a good many have passed through my
hands, as the saying is, but I have never seen a nicer nor a more
aristocratic looking young man than M. Eugene. How handsome he looks
sleeping! Just let his head rest on your shoulder, Mme. Couture. Pshaw!
he falls over towards Mlle. Victorine. There's a special providence for
young things. A little more, and he would have broken his head against
the knob of the chair. They'd make a pretty pair those two would!"

"Hush, my good neighbor," cried Mme. Couture, "you are saying such
things----"

"Pooh!" put in Mme. Vauquer, "he does not hear.--Here, Sylvie! come and
help me to dress. I shall put on my best stays."

"What! your best stays just after dinner, madame?" said Sylvie. "No, you
can get some one else to lace you. I am not going to be your murderer.
It's a rash thing to do, and might cost you your life."

"I don't care, I must do honor to M. Vautrin."

"Are you so fond of your heirs as all that?"

"Come, Sylvie, don't argue," said the widow, as she left the room.

"At her age, too!" said the cook to Victorine, pointing to her mistress
as she spoke.

Mme. Couture and her ward were left in the dining-room, and Eugene
slept on Victorine's shoulder. The sound of Christophe's snoring echoed
through the silent house; Eugene's quiet breathing seemed all the
quieter by force of contrast, he was sleeping as peacefully as a child.
Victorine was very happy; she was free to perform one of those acts of
charity which form an innocent outlet for all the overflowing sentiments
of a woman's nature; he was so close to her that she could feel the
throbbing of his heart; there was a look of almost maternal protection
and conscious pride in Victorine's face. Among the countless thoughts
that crowded up in her young innocent heart, there was a wild flutter of
joy at this close contact.

"Poor, dear child!" said Mme. Couture, squeezing her hand.

The old lady looked at the girl. Victorine's innocent, pathetic face,
so radiant with the new happiness that had befallen her, called to
mind some naive work of mediaeval art, when the painter neglected the
accessories, reserving all the magic of his brush for the quiet,
austere outlines and ivory tints of the face, which seems to have caught
something of the golden glory of heaven.

"After all, he only took two glasses, mamma," said Victorine, passing
her fingers through Eugene's hair.

"Indeed, if he had been a dissipated young man, child, he would have
carried his wine like the rest of them. His drowsiness does him credit."

There was a sound of wheels outside in the street.

"There is M. Vautrin, mamma," said the girl. "Just take M. Eugene. I
would rather not have that man see me like this; there are some ways of
looking at you that seem to sully your soul and make you feel as though
you had nothing on."

"Oh, no, you are wrong!" said Mme. Couture. "M. Vautrin is a worthy man;
he reminds me a little of my late husband, poor dear M. Couture, rough
but kind-hearted; his bark is worse than his bite."

Vautrin came in while she was speaking; he did not make a sound, but
looked for a while at the picture of the two young faces--the lamplight
falling full upon them seemed to caress them.

"Well," he remarked, folding his arms, "here is a picture! It would have
suggested some pleasing pages to Bernardin de Saint-Pierre (good
soul), who wrote _Paul et Virginie_. Youth is very charming, Mme.
Couture!--Sleep on, poor boy," he added, looking at Eugene, "luck
sometimes comes while you are sleeping.--There is something touching and
attractive to me about this young man, madame," he continued; "I know
that his nature is in harmony with his face. Just look, the head of
a cherub on an angel's shoulder! He deserves to be loved. If I were a
woman, I would die (no--not such a fool), I would live for him." He
bent lower and spoke in the widow's ear. "When I see those two together,
madame, I cannot help thinking that Providence meant them for each
other; He works by secret ways, and tries the reins and the heart," he
said in a loud voice. "And when I see you, my children, thus united by
a like purity and by all human affections, I say to myself that it is
quite impossible that the future should separate you. God is just."--He
turned to Victorine. "It seems to me," he said, "that I have seen the
line of success in your hand. Let me look at it, Mlle. Victorine; I am
well up in palmistry, and I have told fortunes many a time. Come, now,
don't be frightened. Ah! what do I see? Upon my word, you will be one of
the richest heiresses in Paris before very long. You will heap riches
on the man who loves you. Your father will want you to go and live with
him. You will marry a young and handsome man with a title, and he will
idolize you."

The heavy footsteps of the coquettish widow, who was coming down the
stairs, interrupted Vautrin's fortune-telling. "Here is Mamma Vauquerre,
fair as a starr-r-r, dressed within an inch of her life.--Aren't we a
trifle pinched for room?" he inquired, with his arm round the lady;
"we are screwed up very tightly about the bust, mamma! If we are much
agitated, there may be an explosion; but I will pick up the fragments
with all the care of an antiquary."

"There is a man who can talk the language of French gallantry!" said the
widow, bending to speak in Mme. Couture's ear.

"Good-bye, little ones!" said Vautrin, turning to Eugene and Victorine.
"Bless you both!" and he laid a hand on either head. "Take my word for
it, young lady, an honest man's prayers are worth something; they should
bring you happiness, for God hears them."

"Good-bye, dear," said Mme. Vauquer to her lodger. "Do you think that M.
Vautrin means to run away with me?" she added, lowering her voice.

"Lack-a-day!" said the widow.

"Oh! mamma dear, suppose it should really happen as that kind M. Vautrin
said!" said Victorine with a sigh as she looked at her hands. The two
women were alone together.

"Why, it wouldn't take much to bring it to pass," said the elderly lady;
"just a fall from his horse, and your monster of a brother----"

"Oh! mamma."

"Good Lord! Well, perhaps it is a sin to wish bad luck to an enemy," the
widow remarked. "I will do penance for it. Still, I would strew
flowers on his grave with the greatest pleasure, and that is the truth.
Black-hearted, that he is! The coward couldn't speak up for his own
mother, and cheats you out of your share by deceit and trickery. My
cousin had a pretty fortune of her own, but unluckily for you, nothing
was said in the marriage-contract about anything that she might come in
for."

"It would be very hard if my fortune is to cost some one else his life,"
said Victorine. "If I cannot be happy unless my brother is to be taken
out of the world, I would rather stay here all my life."

"_Mon Dieu!_ it is just as that good M. Vautrin says, and he is full of
piety, you see," Mme. Couture remarked. "I am very glad to find that
he is not an unbeliever like the rest of them that talk of the Almighty
with less respect than they do of the Devil. Well, as he was saying, who
can know the ways by which it may please Providence to lead us?"

With Sylvie's help the two women at last succeeded in getting Eugene
up to his room; they laid him on the bed, and the cook unfastened
his clothes to make him more comfortable. Before they left the room,
Victorine snatched an opportunity when her guardian's back was turned,
and pressed a kiss on Eugene's forehead, feeling all the joy that this
stolen pleasure could give her. Then she looked round the room, and
gathering up, as it were, into one single thought all the untold bliss
of that day, she made a picture of her memories, and dwelt upon it until
she slept, the happiest creature in Paris.

That evening's merry-making, in the course of which Vautrin had
given the drugged wine to Eugene and Father Goriot, was his own
ruin. Bianchon, flustered with wine, forgot to open the subject of
Trompe-la-Mort with Mlle. Michonneau. The mere mention of the name would
have set Vautrin on his guard; for Vautrin, or, to give him his real
name, Jacques Collin, was in fact the notorious escaped convict.

But it was the joke about the Venus of Pere-Lachaise that finally
decided his fate. Mlle. Michonneau had very nearly made up her mind to
warn the convict and to throw herself on his generosity, with the idea
of making a better bargain for herself by helping him to escape that
night; but as it was, she went out escorted by Poiret in search of the
famous chief of detectives in the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, still thinking
that it was the district superintendent--one Gondureau--with whom she
had to do. The head of the department received his visitors courteously.
There was a little talk, and the details were definitely arranged. Mlle.
Michonneau asked for the draught that she was to administer in order to
set about her investigation. But the great man's evident satisfaction
set Mlle. Michonneau thinking; and she began to see that this business
involved something more than the mere capture of a runaway convict. She
racked her brains while he looked in a drawer in his desk for the
little phial, and it dawned upon her that in consequence of treacherous
revelations made by the prisoners the police were hoping to lay their
hands on a considerable sum of money. But on hinting her suspicions to
the old fox of the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, that officer began to smile,
and tried to put her off the scent.

"A delusion," he said. "Collin's _sorbonne_ is the most dangerous that
has yet been found among the dangerous classes. That is all, and the
rascals are quite aware of it. They rally round him; he is the backbone
